---
title: "A Stoic Book Review of the Odyssey (Episode 215)"
slug: a-stoic-book-review-of-the-odyssey
episode_number: 215
youtube_id: tXSow3Mvs_U
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tXSow3Mvs_U
upload_date: 2025-12-23
duration: 1:00:46
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Michael Trombllay >> and I'm Caleb Antiveros >> and today we are talking about the Stoics and Homer or more specifically Stoicism and the Odyssey. Kind of a Stoic book review of the Odyssey. So Caleb and I have each read it. Great book. Caleb, you've read it. It was a reread for you. It was my first time reading it. This was partly inspired because there's the Christopher Nolan Odyssey movie coming out shortly and I was like, I want to be able to compare this or say if he did a good job or not. And then partially motivated by the fact that I was like, I really should read this. Um, it's a pretty influential book um to the ancient thinkers. And I always like to think about, you know, we go and we read the Stoics, but the Stoics were reading or listening to Homer and that was intellectual and cultural tradition from before their time that they were kind of looking up to and responding to. So I thought it would be a fun book to talk about today and to review. So before we jump into it, I wanted to provide a bit of context. So why I mean we are a stoicism podcast but why [snorts] uh you know a stoic inspired book review of the of the Odyssey and a couple reasons. First is that I did some research before this episode and all three of the original leads of the Stoic school so Zeno Cleanths and Chrysopus they all wrote on Homer. We've lost a lot of this but this was a kind of tradition or book that the Stoics were responding to. Zeno's longest work or possibly his longest work was called homeriic problems and it was kind of it was some interpreters or some classicists believe that it was an attempt to um interpret Homer as a stoic or reconcile Homer with Stoic teachings and thought the stories of the Iliad and the Odyssey. um and Philodemus in particular he says that Chrysopus and Cleanth sought to harmonize stoic doctrines with the works of Homer. So the Stoics were responding to and interested in the Odyssey in the Iliad. Um and we see that in the Roman Stoics, the sources that we still have. Epictitus references Homer to his students. um in discourses book one chapter 28 he has this lovely passage about how all of the Ilia and the Odyssey rested on impressions. These are like the most significant uh stories these these incredible battles and wars they all they all depended upon impressions and how people responded to them. So if Paris did not have an impression to run away with Helen of Troy, then the entire Iliad would have been lost in the Odyssey 2. And so it's this it's this point about how all of human action, folly, greatness is reducible to making use of impressions. Very epicus idea. Making use of good use of our our impressions of situations or bad uses as well. And Marcus Aurelius in the meditations book 11 uh section 31 he quotes the Odyssey. He says and my heart laughed within which is from the scene in the Odyssey where Odysius has successfully tricked the Cyclops, blinded him and got his men away to the relative safety of his ship. So the the cyclops is, you know, eating eating Adysius's men and has them trapped and he's he's tricked them and he's like, "Huh, my heart has laughed at, you know, having successfully tricked you and escaped." So um I want to kind of continue in this stoic tradition. Let's treat this book as an important one worth considering with many lessons. And then I also wanted to structure this conversation around what parts of the Odyssey are stoic in nature, what parts do I think resonate res uh resonate with stoic themes and teachings and which parts are not stoic or un stoic. Maybe that which parts are homeic problems for the stoic um or just different ways of portraying greatness or virtue than the stoics might. anything to add to that before we jump into it? >> Yeah. Well, this is a this is a good topic. I think um [snorts] it's somewhat daunting just because the Odyssey is such a staple of western really world literature. I mean it's probably one of the you know top five foundational works certainly in the west top 10 in the uh world seems like a plot for very plausible claim and uh at least the conjunction of the Odyssey and the Iliad I should say at least Homer should certainly be up there just because of the massive influence on people in general you know pivotable figures in history whether that comes whether that's a matter of the political artistic philosophical arena and uh you know as you say the stoics themselves interacted with uh Homer which is uh which is I think very cool. Yeah it's a good topic. I think it's about the third time I've read the Odyssey. It is a book many people might first encounter in school uh which can be unfortunate. I think there's a way in which being forced to read a book makes it less enjoyable. That was certainly the case for me, but coming back to it, coming back to different translations, I think it really is a worth revisiting and it does have uh a number of philosophical themes and uh there's a reason why it's uh been so influential. So, I think that place in the canon is certainly justified. >> Yeah, [snorts] good points. We we were joking, Caleb, that doing this is like we're gonna do a book review in an hour on the Bible or something. Maybe not. Maybe the Bible is one of those things that's above the, you know, if if if this is top five, maybe that's number one, but it's like kind of something in that scope. People obviously do their entire dissertations. They spend their entire career focusing on sub aspects of this single work. So, this is very much going to be a survey, but I that's that's a fun project. That's a fun project as well. >> Yeah. Yeah. And I think what makes these works approachable is in some sense that they do have this incredible depth, but also anyone can pick up the odyssey and read through the story and find familiar themes. So I think that's we know it has at once both that sort of daunting aspect to at least a comment on it, but uh is also very accessible really. >> Yeah. Great. So, I'm going to kick off with a plot summary just in case, just refresh people and to hopefully make this engaging for those who maybe haven't read it or haven't read it in a while or are familiar with the idea. I think everybody could kind of describe it in uh larger strokes about, you know, Adysius is trying to get home for he's taking a long journey back, but I I'll go through kind of the main plot points because those will be the ones we're responding to. again um really at a at a high level. Um so the Odyssey as a as a book is about the 10-year journey that Adysius spends traveling home at the end of the Trojan War. So the Iliad is the story of the Trojan War. It's a story of Achilles, um Helen of Troy, Paris, Hector, and Odysius is a character. He is the king of Ithaca and he is fights in that war. the war concludes and he is trying to make it home and he keeps getting um way laid or things keep intervening in that process and it ends up being this this 10-year journey home after a 10-year battle in Troy. So, it's actually this 20 years away from home. Um there there's there's lots of things that he encounters on this this trip home. So, there's mutiny of his crew. There's the sirens that that famous story where um you know people have to they put the beeswax in their ears so they can't hear the singing of the sirens um because they kind of entraps men if they if they hear hear that song. There's the Cyclops, that mythological figure. They end up on an island trapped in a cave with the Cyclops who's eating some of the men and they have to trick their way out. There's Cersei who's a witch who turns his men into pigs. Um, so all these kind of situations come up and it's it's almost episodic and something happens, portion of the crew dies terribly and then they continue on their way. But what I didn't realize is that it's it's actually framed, it's not just that story, it's framed within another conflict, which is almost the main conflict. It's the opening of the story and the close of the story, which is that at home, Adysius's wife, Penelopey, is onset by suitors. And these are rich, powerful men from other states that are trying to marry her. She refuses to marry without confirmation of Adysius's death, but the plausible deniability of his death is getting stretched over time um as other people return from the Trojan War and no one has uh news of Adysius returning or being alive. And the suitors because of some complex Greek norms that I don't really understand, they're not able to be kicked out. So, they have to be treated like guests and they're welcome and they're they're staying. Um, they're spending Adysius's money and they're eating his food, but they're they're being disrespectful in return. So, they're kind of being offered they're they're being welcomed in as guests, but they're not maybe like reciprocating that respect, and they're kind of being disrespectful by staying staying in his space as well for this prolonged period of time. And the story actually starts with Adysius's son, Telmacus, reaching a mature age and leaving to travel to Sparta to find news about his father and just reaching like, "I can't stand these suitors anymore. We've got to do something about them. I've got to find out if my father's alive because they're you they're eating us out of house and home. They're spending all our money and we can't keep going on like this." And so at at the climax of the story, after all those events we talked about, Adysius returns to Ithaca after losing all of his men. He's alone. He's disguised as an old beggar by Athena. He infiltrates his home in disguise with the help of his son, who knows that he's home, but they haven't told his wife Penelopey yet. [snorts] He then tricks all the suitors into a challenge where he has to shoot an arrow with his own bow, Adysius's bow, through the holes, the hole of 12 axes or the holes of 12 axes. And the winner will win Penelopey's hand. It's kind of it's a bet. And all of the suitors are unable to do this challenge. And then Odysius does it with his um strength and knowledge of the bow. Um he earns Penelopey's hand a second time, reveals his true identity, and then they just him and his son kill all the suitors as well as the servants and maids that were unfaithful to his house or seemed to side with the with the suitors in in the 10 years he was gone. And then the book ends with Athena intervening to stop retaliation from the families of the suitors, calling basically a ceasefire and saying, "This is kind of the the new steady state. Let's stop the fighting. These men got what they deserve. Let's let's return to a peaceful time." Um, [snorts] so overall a happy ending, but a one full of kind of bloodshed and I guess righteous revenge at the end. Um, so that that's it at a high level. anything that you would add? >> Yeah, I think that's a good summary. I think it's worth remembering that Odysius didn't want to go to Troy and uh so he's a man who spent 20 years away from home and uh is certainly homesick while his home is in shambles while his son grows up. He misses out on the childhood and of course uh misses out on the life of his kingdom, his wife and more. So he's I think that's what often throughout the Odyssey I think he's given terms like uh the man who knows pain or son of pain or something of this sort uh because he has you know he's undergoing a trial. [snorts] >> Yep. He's sad. He he's quite he's he's he's he's wants to get home. He wants to be back with his family. Another thing, we won't go back to this, but I guess the funniest part I thought reading it for the first time. This is this has nothing to do with stoicism, but I just thought when when when you encounter the sirens, there's that famous thing of Adysius being tied to the ship, right? So, he doesn't um you know, jump into the water or command his men to follow the sounds of the sirens. So all the men put beeswax in their ears and Adysius is tied to the ship. [snorts] And I thought it was like I thought he had to be tied to the ship for some reason like he heard the sound accidentally or he needed to be awake to the sound so that he could provide some sort of communication to his men. But in the book he's just like I just want to hear the song. I hear the I heard that song is like really cool and like I'm interested in what the siren s sound like. So just like tie me up. you all plug your ears, but tie me up cuz I want to hear it. And I just thought that was there's no theme to that. I just thought that was funny that it just he just just wanted to hear the music. Um there was no sort of conflict or dilemma for that. >> That was that >> Yeah, he has high he has high openness to experience. >> Yeah, [laughter] we bit uh today. But yeah, I think it's you can also tie it to his craving for knowledge perhaps his intelligence >> uh and that uh kind of curiosity that wants to learn about the world even these dangerous uh aspects about it. You know, it's a dangerous experience certainly listening to the sirens, but one he wanted to conquer or master or experience or something like this. >> I just think it's funny cuz it's like if it's worth having, he's just like, "Forget all my men." Like you all like you could say you could sell it as like, "Yeah, it's a difficult thing that's worth experiencing safely, but then even then he's like, yeah, but none of you get to do it. you all row, you know, put some put some uh ear your ear plugs in and get rowing. >> Yeah. Yeah. They're certainly in the hierarchy. >> Cool. So, in terms of we'll go through some themes that came out, um some stoic themes and some non- stoic themes. Um I'll kick things off. So, the first one that came the first idea that came out to me in this book was this just this theme of perseverance. So the Odyssey to me was fundamentally a story of persevering in the face of obstacles. I mean you talk about it as a trial, but I it's somebody who fa like this is a hero who consistently fails. He's the he's the hero. He's the smartest person in the room, but again and again he he I I I don't I don't think necessarily because of his fault. I don't know necessarily if he makes bad decisions, but certainly fate, the gods, people more powerful than him come in between him and his goal. And he fails to achieve his goal again and again and again. And what he kind of does is refuses to give up. He refuses to stop pursuing. Almost reminds me of Lord of the Rings. I think about Lord of the Rings and the virtue of Frodo and just being somebody who, you know, is just able to endure more than other people. Um, as well as being, you know, a virtuous person, kind and not desiring the power of the ring, but also just like able to endure as a as a as a virtue in of itself. And so for me, the the Odyssey is kind of that celebration of that. This happens, this happens, this happens, but I keep going. And and so you both have these bad things which kind of threaten to break Adysius, but then you also have these temptations. So, at multiple points, he's offered a permanent position with a beautiful woman. Um, there's Cersei, who wants to marry him. There's the nymph, Calypso, um, who's a kind of demigod, who actually he lives with for a number of years. I think like seven or eight years of the Odyssey is just him with Calypso, who's kept him as as a I guess almost like a like a romantic sexual partner, but not one that's free to leave. And then in in one point he he arrives at a state where he's is it Fisha? I'm not sure if I'm saying that one right. How do you say that? >> Yeah, I think that's right. Fisha. >> Fisha. So he arrives in Fisha and he's you know offered the king loves him and he's offered to marry the beautiful young princess Nasika and you know become a prince in this new land and he's just like oh that's great. this is like a genuine temptation, but like no, I just don't want to. I want to go home. I want to get back to my family. I want to be with my wife. Yeah, I think that's cool. That's like that's inspiring. Um, and it's a stoic I think it's this stoic idea of Yeah. as opposed to like the cool you if you think of the heroes Achilles, the cool Achilles who goes out and he gets what he wants and he does what he wants and his like his problem is his own character, his own anger. Odysius has this has this virtuous goal to be reunited with his family. all these things keep getting in the way and his way of controlling what's up to him is just to continue to persevere, continue to take steps towards the goal and then eventually that's um that's rewarded. He achieves his goal. What do you think of that? >> Yeah, I think that's well put. I think he perseveres both through pain and pleasure >> as it were. So, but you know that's that piece of temptation that he needs to, you know, encounter, overcome. And uh I've I've seen it. I know some people, you know, an initial reaction to the Odyssey is that they see Odysius as almost uh incompetent or he doesn't, you know, he doesn't bring come back with his men. >> [snorts] >> Maybe that's that's one knee-jerk reaction. Whereas, of course, other people might have the completely opposite reaction where he's exceptionally, you know, intelligent, gifted, favored by the gods. But I in some ways I do think it's a good picture of competency in a, you know, difficult arena where Adysius makes mistakes, he gets unlucky, makes ser has but also makes uh some excellent decisions. And um I think up close a lot of competency often looks like that and uh especially in you know situations like war or you know any any journey like this that's demands cooperation between different people strangers you know combating nature. Uh so I I think any situation like that even very competent people are going to make excellent decisions of course that's what makes them competent and they limit their mistakes. You know, Odysius doesn't make the kinds of mistakes his crewmen do, but he still does make serious uh mistakes that are both uh arguably flaws of and reveal flaws in his character. So, uh but but I think that's that's consistent with all that's to say, I think that's consistent with being exceptionally competent and uh of course part of his competency is in his ability to persist where others might not. Yeah, I think that I like that point about real compet real competency. You think about like a great baseball team that has like a winning percentage. You think even the best teams they're like 60% 65% something like this. It's it's competency in really difficult arenas means coming out ahead more often than not. Or it might mean staying in the game long enough to have the good outcome. Um, and he displays that a kind of more realistic picture of human competency than somebody who just makes perfect decisions, especially in situations where outcomes are unknown. Because I think that's also part of stoicism is that you're not going to have perfect outcomes because you're always going to be making the decisions on limit or flawed information. And so part of doing the best with what's up to you is, and I don't think Adysius is perfect. I don't think he does the best with what's up to him necessarily, but sometimes, you know, you can make the best plan and if Poseidon says, you know what, I don't like this guy. It doesn't matter how good your plan was. And so there's a real kind of subservience. Yeah. There's like the subservience to fate or I don't know, subservience is the right word. this like willingness to endure fate or to be >> endure thi things more powerful than you and then continue to persevere which is which is yeah I think stoic >> yeah I think so it may also be and I'd like to revisit this a really a good model for for how to respond to mistakes you've made uh which is uh I think if you put it yeah I wonder if there's a better way to put this. But that's while listening to the story or reading it again, I thought maybe there's something there. He doesn't he doesn't exactly dwell on his mistakes, but you don't see him repeat the mistakes he makes. So an instance of this is he taunts the Cyclops uh when he shouldn't and that causes trouble for him and his men. you know, he sort of is ungracious in victory, which I think arguably is a mistake he doesn't make later in the book. You can correct me if if I'm wrong, but I don't I don't see him repeating, you know, these these kinds of mistakes or nor dwelling on them, of course. He he he taunts they they escape the Cyclops in a ship and he taunts him in some way and then the Cyclops throws I think it's like a giant rock but they're not quite far enough away yet and the rock almost just entirely destroys the ship and there's just this kind of like oh oops moment like that could have been really bad and we didn't need to do that but yeah I like the idea of the emotionally resilient but but hyper receptive to like new information. There's something to that like you're picking up skills, you're understand, you're developing your craft, but you're not uh you're not kind of emotionally dwelling on failures or mistakes in a way that's unproductive. >> Mhm. >> Yeah. Oh, did you want to ping pong him or do you want to go for a >> Let's ping pong. >> Okay, cool. What? So one aspect of the Odyssey that I do think is stoic is highlighting intelligence as a virtue as a part of prudence as a part of wisdom perhaps a sub component of uh wisdom. Od Odysius is known for being exceptionally quick mentally for being creative coming up with solutions to problems. Of course, in the Iliot, he I believe is the one who comes up with the idea of using a Trojan horse. >> Mhm. >> Certainly argues for it. He's the one who comes up with a crafty idea for escaping the uh Cyclops cave, uh dealing with the suitors and so on, and is favored by Athena, the goddess of wisdom, in part because of his, you know, ability to think, to think clearly. And that's contrasted perhaps with many other with his peers I suppose his heroic peers people like Achilles who's known perhaps more for swiftness of body than swiftness of mind or Agamemnon uh the king and uh I think I think there's something it's not it's not not to say there's sort of a worship of intelligence or that's the only value of course in the Odyssey but there's there's something in highlighting that ability, you know, praising it and uh that being connected to the pursuit of knowledge. Uh, of course, the ability to make good decisions and uh I think that's a that's a stoic theme. >> Yeah, absolutely. Which is I'm not enough of a classicist to know the answer to this, but I think it's interesting to it's an interesting question of who is the, you know, who's the real hero of that duology. Is it Achilles or Odysius? And I must assume it's Adysius if he's the one that gets the happy ending. Like if he is really the archetype of the excellent Greek man [snorts] for the ancient Greeks, then that is that is um one with an emphasis in intelligence as you said, emphasis in prudence, intellect, good decision-m. But then this is not to say they're not but then they're also interested in the body, right? Like he's also still incredibly strong and fit. There's all these really funny scenes in the Odyssey where he's either disguised as an old man or Athena makes him look weaker than he is and then he, you know, takes off his shirt and he has got this huge chest or something. Everybody's like, "Oh my god, this beggar is is so >> Yeah, this beggar's ripped." >> Yeah. This is wild. Uh, [laughter] which just is like all >> wins a discus competition. >> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So he's like it's it's um it's almost like there there's there's still there's still a emphasis on the physical, but uh agree with you that it it puts this it puts this like skillful decision making as the the kind of ultimate heroic trait. >> Yeah, I think so. At least it's I think essential to why Odysius is is a hero. Certainly. >> Mhm. Okay, another one, another stoic theme. So, agree with you there on intelligence, the importance of intelligence. Another stoic theme that comes out in this is this idea of exile, being a guest, cosmopolitanism. So, the respect you tr do or do not treat guests or other humans or people from other cities in virtue of them being guests versus members of your community. It's it's like a lot of time people spend in other people's houses showing up as strangers and a lot of people are constantly judged by how well they treat strangers or how poorly they treat strangers. Um you know so sometimes Adysius is treated poorly like by the Cyclops like he's like hi Cyclops I just you know I just would like some food and we need some shelter and he's the cyclops like I think I will eat you um instead and that's that's a bad way to treat a guest. And then like I was saying before when he's in uh Fishia um he's treated really well. They're like stay forever you know we we we'd love to have you here. Um then Adysius he returns back to Ithaca in disguise and then he's treated like a guest in his own land. And again you get this moral judgment of people. Some people are really kind to him even though he looks like a beggar and some people um are judgmental of him as a beggar and the the suitors are like get out of here. We don't need your kind of thing. And implicitly we're supposed to judge these people for that. They're not treating strangers well. They're not treating uh the poor well. Um they're kind of breaking this virtue of of treating people like guests properly. So it it also may made me reflect on the importance of cosmopolitanism. Um how fragile we are as people, how much we rely on the kindness of others. Um, I think today's society can make us feel more resilient than we are because it's so uncommon for us to ever really be alone in the wilderness for as ever to, you know, come upon somebody and say, "Hey, can I have some water and some shelter and need that?" And if the person says no, you might die or you might lose a couple toes in the cold. We don't really have those moments where it's Odicius constantly encountering those moments as a true exile. And well, we're seeing the value, the virtue of cosmopolitanism in action when people accept him, welcome him, clothe him. I Yeah, I'll stop there. Anything to add to that? There's a there's the idea of there's an ancient Greek idea of Zenia kind of uh morality or custom for hospitality where the host where hosts and guests have their own respective obligations parts to play and I think that's sort of the essential I think that is the essential norm in the Odyssey and characters are evaluated by whether they are good hosts or good guests. And of course, you see it in the story of the Cyclops. The suitors are terrible guests and are judged as terrible people for that reason. The uh you know there's also the many incidents of course, but there's the giants that are terrible hosts uh to Adysius's crew. There's Adysius's crew who are terrible guests by and consume the cows of Helios, the sun god cows that were not owed or they were not theirs. You get a little bit more of a mixed picture with with Cersei perhaps. Um but something that makes the interactions of uh Odysius with many people, you know, why Odysius comes out on top as it were or has the god's favor is that he is both a good guest and a good host. You know, he follows the rituals, accepts gifts, is speaks to his hosts exceptionally well. when he's in ethica, you see him, you know, treat both goat herders and nobility with the same amount of respect. Uh at least at least initially and then if they respond poorly, then he'll respond poorly, of course. But you have that that initial uh you know that initial olive branch of of a good host, of a good guest that Odysius provides others. Yeah, I think those are some great examples. >> I don't think we talk about that that this much. We don't think we talk about that virtue that much anymore. I don't think we emphasize it that much. Um, I mean, maybe we think about this on a political level or you think about like our responsibilities towards refugees or our responsibility towards towards immigration. I think maybe you see that on the individual level about some people there there is some hosting at an individual level still and some kind of social norm but I it is almost it almost comes off like a social norm nowadays if someone comes over and you're supposed to say well can I get you a drink >> rather than here where it's like we're we're judging people's character in this ep this epic story based on their capacity to host and as you said basic based on their capacity to be a good guest as well. It it it's just such has such moral weight to it in the story. >> Yeah, that's I think that's a good point. Perhaps when you host when you think about being a good host uh in ordinary life, being a good guest in ordinary life, it often is much lower stakes and perhaps for that reason may seem to have much lower moral weight. You think about being a good host, that's someone who knows how to entertain, which is part of being a good host in the Odyssey. But the entertainments are quite extreme if you think about the Phoenicians again or they're they're very elaborate, you know, essentially throwing games in honor of Odysius. Uh but it's also much more than uh merely knowing how to entertain, you know, their serious gifts that have material and political implications. you know, the way in which King Netor is a good host to Tmicus, I think really goes above, you know, just simply knowing how to entertain. Uh, so I think there's there's perhaps, you know, it maybe it is something something to think more about as a skill, as a virtue. >> Mhm. >> I do think there's a also the political idea is interesting. I think it's almost perhaps this is a there's a small distinction here between cosmopolitanism and the uh Zenia of the Odyssey where it really matters that you're face to face with your host and your guests and it sounds such a smaller idea perhaps than cosmopolitanism which is about at the political scale you know the everyone is in some sense a citizen of the world at the cosmic scale you know everyone's a human being everyone's rational. Perhaps that can ground, you know, these these norms of being a good guest, being a good host and such, but there's a sense of which like that does seem like a larger idea and than what you get in the Odyssey. Not sure what you think about that. Yeah, I like that distinction. I mean, that would just this is the distinction. Cosmopolitanism is one way to ground why you need to be a good host because as you said, it's this idea that we are all you know, we're all part of the same universe. There's two ways to think about being a good host. It's like, I need to host you because you're something other than me and there's certain obligations we have towards people that are other than us to be nice to them because they might return the favor someday. They might reciprocate because we're in a position to do so. And then cosmopolitism is is to say you need to be nice to that person because they're literally not other to you. They are not >> they are part of your city. They are part of your family. family's taking the metaphor further, but they are you are part of the same state. So I'm not I'm not being nice to somebody from another country. We are all from the same country of being human. So it is a step it is a step further. I agree. It just feels very cosmopolitan. I ironically good hosting in the Odyssey even though they they're very clear like I'm from Ithaca, I'm from this place, I'm from that place because they they reciprocate these good norms of welcoming they almost feel more cosmopolitan than people do today. So yeah, there's something about that about maybe maybe you you end up at a similar place. Yeah, there's a there's a related theme here that I think has fits well with stoicism, but uh it's not always what we emphasize, which is um it's almost like tacted as a virtue as an essential skill, social tact. And I think that's related to related to this idea of, you know, being a good guest and being a a good host. But um you see Odysius you know generally he acts with uh great tact with both his hosts and his enemies. You know he asserts himself but he allows others to save face. Think about his interactions with the Ephesians in particular. You know he knows how to compliment people well perhaps without without overdoing it. And he, you know, there's a funny situation where he's sort of called out for avoiding some of the games by a by a young Fian. And uh he's able to, you know, start beat his chest a little bit and prove his worth by uh winning a short discus contest, but he doesn't go overboard with it in a way that other uh Greek characters might. Uh so I think he has he has that kind of he's certainly very uh socially skilled, socially intelligent. You see the same attribute in his wife Penelope. They're not uh in contrast to some of the suitors would be the obvious contrast I think who act in a kind of reckless way who don't [clears throat] treat you either their superiors or people who are might lower them lower than them on the status hierarchy with uh social skill with you know they're not classy people one might say. So, I think that's cool to see that as a as a uh as an essential part of treating people well, thinking about, you know, attacked perhaps as a as a sub subcomponent, sub virtue of of that project. >> So, I just had to look up the definition of tact to make sure cuz like that's one of those words where like I think I could use it in a sentence, but I have to be 100% certain. So that just says like really skilled at navigating difficult situations without upsetting people or offending people. Is this is this how you meant it? >> Yeah. I think it's uh what's it kind of social sensitivity perhaps? >> Yeah. Yeah. >> That makes you know you can sort of if you think about difficult situations you've been in someone with tact is able to, you know, maybe bring up a difficult point or compliment someone well and land the plane as it were. And you know the you almost wonder if they're going to be be able to pull it off and then they do or if it feels feels seamless in the end. So >> well and you compare this to the main conflict one of the main conflicts in the Iliad which is uh Achilles having Bortact and getting fighting with Agamemedon who's the the leader of the troops. They're kind of getting out at it with each other. Achilles refuses to participate because he doesn't feel appropriately respected. Agamemnon doesn't feel appropriately respected and they're kind of like at this point of like non-communication. They haven't settled it. Neither of them can swallow their pride enough to like talk to each other properly. It is like a poor tact situation. Um and so this is this is a good contrast. And the thing about tax >> that's a good example. Well, sorry to interrupt, but I think I think that's a great great example. Agamemnon can't It feels like he's not being respected as the greatest king. Achilles believes is not being respected as the greatest warrior. And it's noteworthy that Agamemnon sends Odysius to talk to Achilles when >> Achilles is sulking and Agamemnon wants him back on the battlefield. >> Yeah. Sorry to interrupt. Go ahead. >> No, no. Exactly. Yeah. He's the tax master. And again, it's like I don't know if you feel this way, Kila. Maybe it's just growing up the way I I I grew up. you kind of push back against these social norms as being shallow. Like this idea of being be a good host, have tacted. Like it almost seems they're almost these like inauthentic virtues. It's like don't express your it feels like it's like when you're a teenager, it feels like I can't express myself honestly. I can't say what I really think. I I just have to like worry about offending people. um you know why can't I talk about politics and religion at dinner kind of thing and so it's interesting to see it presented here in like who is a rather mature character as you know clearly this is not a shallow person trying to maintain good face for shallow reasons this is somebody who thinks tact is an important part of being a great ruler and a good mature adult and I think you hit on that idea of sense sensitivity of um that's really what it is is it's like what's the opposite of tact maybe it's being you know too emotionally sensitive to to engage in this but it's probably just being so selfobsessed because you get offended or you get focused on what you're talking about that you're not paying attention to other people. You're not considering what other people are thinking or feeling. >> And so that tact is that that being sensitive to other people. We had this idea. We did we did a episode on this recently about like standing up for yourself as which is like um like list this ability that you try to hit in stoicism of understanding other people not bulldozing over them but also not conceding and just doing whatever they want. That kind of middle ground is what what I see tacked as. You know, you're not going to make a bigger stink than you have to to get your point across. you're not going to offend unnecessarily. But, you know, if I need to jab out the Cyclops eye with a burning spear, I will do it. But that's not, you know, I don't have to be uh I don't have to be rude. I just have to do what I have to do. >> Yeah, I think that's a that's a that's well put. I also think I come from and perhaps it's obvious to people that this is, you know, how you speak to people [gasps] uh really matters both for for your own sake and for their sake. uh being sensitive to others is is important, but I do think there are at least some um aspects of culture that maybe don't value social tact as much. You might see it in more academic or nerdy circles where the kind of speech that's prized as exceptionally literal, you know, bluntness perhaps is valued. Uh and and I think there are reasons to both be literal and often to be blunt in many kind of situations, but perhaps one can do so uh you know, of course, one can do so poorly. And sometimes it seems like that might be a uh those sorts of social norms can be an excuse for just being socially lazy. >> Yeah, don't be lazy. Be intentional and sensitive to what's going on. I think that that's a general stoic takeaway. And Odysius certainly isn't lazy. Um, I I wanted to get now to some non- stoic themes. One that one that came out to me is this idea of emotional heroes. So, something that struck me in this story is the amount that Adysius cries, the amount that he grieavves. He sits depressed for seven years with Calypso. Calypso is the nymph I was mentioning who takes him on as a um you know as a I don't know if I want to say sex slave but like somebody who has to live with her unconsensually and she's like come on I'm beautiful you you could just like I'm I'm divine you could live with me and he's just like I just really want to get back to my wife and he's just like he's very very sad when he hears he at one point in the story he hears a story about Troy told from a storyteller the story teller recounts the story of Troy and the Trojan War and he openly cries. And so I I think we get here this masculine hero that feels deeply. So he's not feeling the burning anger of Achilles, but he's still feeling very deeply. He's persevering against things that weigh on him deeply. And I suppose this is not any surprise. It's just not the stoic, you know, Adysius is not the hero who is the stoic sage who rises above it all. sits above sits in kind of the clouds and is [snorts] not concerned with earthly things. It's a it's a very non-s stoic way of telling a hero. It's somebody who encounters tragedy um and then overcomes them through the strength of their character and the strength of their decisions. But these things are very much tragedies to him. as you said, him missing the the the aging of his son, his son becoming an adult, him being away from his his wife, Penelopey. These are very much tragedies. And it's okay for this masculine hero, I was at least reading the book as saying it's okay for him to be sad about it. What matters then is is what you do next. >> Yeah. There's not that you don't have the kind of I think it's both interesting from a stoic perspective uh where Odysius's grief is not seen as a character flaw which is somewhat anti- stoic but also of course from a perspective of modern masculinity where the fact that he cries openly is not seen as making him less of a man and does so in multiple multiple occasions. So that I think that's that's interesting as well. and probably is, you know, I think essentially rooted in the fact that Homer is not a stoic. He does value what the Stoics would call indifference. And you know, if you're robbed from of these indifference, whether it's wealth, glory, relationships, that's something worth grieving over. You you've been you've been harmed and indeed you can seek revenge uh in some cases and it would be good of you to do so. >> Yeah, it is like a a more traditional conception of right and wrong. It's it's not a stoic it's not a stoic view of value. Yeah. There there are times when it's appropriate to be to seek revenge. I don't think Adysius avoids the kind of irrational anger of an Achilles. Maybe like he his anger doesn't make him dumb. At least maybe not not often. Maybe sometimes he gets a little bit too cocky or um a little bit riled up. But this is not a, you know, maybe it's hard to tell because he finds out about the suitors very late, right? Only when he arrives on the island and then he concocts a plan and then he executes the plan. It's not like he's waiting for 10 years to get back and is like nursing this vengeance over that period of time. He he has a he has a goal that's based in the pursuit of a good thing and then when he comes home he identifies a problem in his land and then he takes steps to rectify it. Not even so much revenge as just you know there's these kind of invaders. There's these people in my house and I need to get them out. >> Yeah. I I I do think that's rooted in revenge though. It's uh and and is a matter of sort of seeing him, you know, Odysius is sees the suitor's presence is disrespecting him, his house, his wife, his son, which it's probably correct judgment, but thinks, you know, they're uh they're the right punishment for them would be death. And I think there are, you know, there are certainly are descriptions of him being angry, but as you say, it doesn't he doesn't lose his head over it, even if it does motivate his actions. I think there's the scene where, you know, he comes to Etha as a vagrant and some other vagrant makes fun of him. Do you remember this? He's like, "Get off the porch or something like this. I can't I can't exactly remember what the disagreement is over." He's like, "You're not the v, you know, you're not the vagrant in this area. I am." And and they come to blows. And there's a specific scene where Odysius thinks through I think he's both recognized as being angry but thinks through you know would it should I just kill him? should I really beat him up or just give him a good whack >> and decides to do the latter because he doesn't want to reveal that you know he's someone unusual of course or >> uh or you know do give have any giveaways because of who he was even if even though you know this homeless guy is respecting him the former king of Ithaca and that that does get to him [snorts] >> yeah he keeps his he keeps his head and he's able to make a choice and makes the prudent choice while still enacting out >> the revenge or the punishment for the being disrespected. >> Yeah. What What do you think about the killing of the suitors? I think some people argue that might be a credential mistake. I think there are arguments for the on opposite side though as well because that does cause later conflict. I find I mean to be honest I find the whole suitor thing really strange that he shows up and then he has to like win Penelopey's heart or like her hand truthfully again that he doesn't just show up and is just like I never lost this hand like it's a it's a weird thing that he has to challenge them and then conquer them like conquer them in fair in a fair challenge but it's a fair challenge that he tricked them into. So I find the whole like resolution of the conflict quite strange. Um, so he kills them all, but he does it kind of in a sneaky way where, if I'm remembering properly, him and his son and a couple other loyal people kind of trap them in an area where they don't really have access to their weapons and he's supported by Athena to like really execute the slaughter effectively instead of just like saying, "Hey, I'm coming home. I'll I'll, you know, if you guys are still there, we're going to have a fight." you know, instead of this like trial by open combat or something. [snorts] Um, I I don't know. Predentially, potentially I it's hard for me to say if it's a bad move because all we have is the information from the book. >> I I I think it's it ended up going fine. So, it ended up being okay. Um, Adysius's argument there is going to be they're just gonna kill me and then when they kill me they're gonna be able to rightfully cling Penelopey's hand because um I'm going to there's going to be evidence that I'm dead and they they have to at this point we haven't really talked about this but they have taken steps to kill him or sorry at least taken steps to kill his son. So, they've shown themselves to be like willing to murder. And so, if you believe that they're going to kill him and then marry his wife, then I think he should take what it's it's almost this act of self-defense instead of revenge, I would say. And then in that sense, it seems to me justified, but depends on if you believe that. >> Right. Right. Yeah. There I mean there is of course they are threatening the life of his son, threatening to take his wife away. Uh, and there's I think there's, you know, they're threatening his life as son in more than one way. There's, you know, the explicit murder plot, but there's also the idea that you're, you know, the son is next in line to be the king, but probably a number of the suitors have designs on if were they to take Penelopey's hand becoming king. Uh, and that's explicitly mentioned. And, uh, I mean, you know, perhaps, you know, the counterargument to managing the suitors more gracefully or having a softer touch there is that it's a perhaps doesn't reveal a kind of or doesn't resolve a fissure that's already happened. You know, there's a power vacuum and it needs to be uh forcefully forcefully addressed. >> Mhm. Yeah. But I'm not sure. Yeah, I'm not sure. I think that's some of the whether it does seem like the at least from whether or not it was the right thing to do credential credentially to the extent those things can be distinguished at least uh some of the suitors needed to be uh you know you were faded to die but the uh >> could you have done could you have done one or two and then been like that be a lesson to you [laughter] >> have to do all of them >> I think there's even the scene now if I'm remembering properly because the end it's gets it's a blur at the where they're like, and then there was this guy, and he was the nicest of the guys. He was the most respectful of the suitors. Uh, but we still just killed him anyway. Um, if I'm remembering properly, so they really just do go through all of them. >> Yeah, perhaps a quick idea. There's even a little bit of wrong is wrong. >> That's that's something that came to mind. >> Mhm. Yeah, good point. >> And perhaps that's something that Homer would embrace here. It's like the shooters just cross a line or something like this. And the maids as well. >> [clears throat] >> needs of the household. Yeah, that's an interesting I read the um Penelope ad by Margaret Atwood right after which is a retelling of the Odyssey from the perspective of Penelope and with this with this emphasis on the maids that get killed because Adysius is basically he he's he's like what of the staff have remained loyal to me and which of the staff have you know slept with consorted with become friends with the suitor ers and uh have not remained loyal and those ones he kills and the penalipad is this it's it's a modern retelling of the Odyssey from the more female ccentric perspective and kind of demonizes that in particular like it's one thing to kill the suitors it's another thing to kill all the maids who are in have in in a much worse position of power right like they don't if the suitor wants to joke around with them if the suitor wants to sleep with them they're not really in position to resist or say no because these are relatively wealthy, powerful men from other states. They're they're they're there as guests. Um it kind of took that perspective. I thought that was that was an interesting one. >> Mhm. Yeah. Yeah. I haven't read that. I've perhaps I should. I often like retellings of uh these ancient stories. >> It's really short, too. So, it was it's like almost like a little epilogue. I read it in a day or two. Oh, >> very nice. >> Cool. Any other non-toic themes you want to hit on hit on or you want to hit on? >> No, that's it for me. Do you have Do you have some? >> Well, one other one then we can call it a wrap. I know we're a little bit a little bit over but it's at least worth shouting out which is um I think we've praised Odysius is you know intelligence his tact but there is also an aspect to the man that is tricky deceitful part of speaking you know his speaking well isn't always a matter of saying true things perhaps for Odysius. He's crafty. There's there's a hilarious bit where he lands on Ithaca, doesn't know where he is, bumps into Athena, who's in disguise, and Athena's like, "Oh, who are you?" And Odysius starts crafting some tale about who he is. That's completely completely false. And uh Athena's like, "You know, of course I'm Athena. You don't need to go do this rigma roll with me, though I respect it." And uh I there's a sense by which I think that is non- stoic even though perhaps there's an aspect to that that is closely related to you know the social skill. uh you know the extent to which Odysius does it perhaps is uh I think not in line with not necess at least it's not a ne straightforward contradiction with stoic philosophy or sto stoic characters but the kinds of people stoics often admire are much more straightforward you know laconic >> uh as opposed to you know more um you know Odysius is really is skirting the edge of being a bullshitter would be one way to one way to put it. He's he's almost there, but he's somehow manages to pull it off. And I don't think Stoics are often in that in that area. >> Yeah. There's like this um stereotype of the East Coast and the West Coast of the United States where it goes, not to offend any West Coasters out there, or maybe you can take which not sure which one's worse. the east coast people are like they're rude to your face but they'll help you when you're in trouble and people on the west coast will uh be really kind and really nice and then they won't help you when you need help. [snorts] And this is kind of the if you're going to take a cynical view to like being a good guest having tacted, it's like this obsession with the social norms but not with the virtue that goes underneath. And so you can read this somebody who has excellent tact as being a good manipulator, as someone who's just sensitive to other people, so able to tell them what they want to hear, to say what people want to think. And so I I I think about that in this way where I think like anything else, the words you use are indifferent. So it's just about what you're using them for. >> And so I think it's okay to [ __ ] for good reasons. I think it's bad to [ __ ] for bad reasons. But you get a sense more that Adysius is just following his own reasons. And if it uh if it helps him, he'll tell you one thing, and if it hurts him, he'll tell you another. And I agree with you. I never thought of this before, but agree with you that the contrast is kind of the stoic position, which is I'm going to tell you what I think. And you know the Epictitus line, I'm going to tell you what I think, and if you cut my head off or throw me in jail, that's a you problem. Like that's a you thing. my job is to just tell you what I think is very much more the the stoic position. Um I think part of that has become because the the bullshitting is like it it's really trying to like intervene in the outcomes of things. It's like really thinking well if I say the right thing here and I do the right thing here then they'll think this which will make them do that which will make them tell this person this and then I'll get the outcome I want. It's like a level of kind of like precision and planning around externals that maybe the stoic is is not inclined towards >> at least not in the the ver at least not Epictitus version of it. >> Yeah, Epictit is certainly not. I think perhaps to the extent you can defend this from the stoic perspective. It's thinking about someone like Senica who has to get his hands dirty with political intrigue uh in order to uh I think the defense of Senica would be to you know make a bad situation slightly better or something of this sort. you know, he can't act like he's, you know, he's there's a, you know, there's a senator who resists a tyrant by to their face, simply saying, you know, being an excellent senator, taking that to be saying someone who, you know, being someone who says speaks truth to power as it were, uh, even if that may result in their death. And then but there's also the political player who perhaps decides you know I'm not going to do that but I'm going to try to work behind the scenes to improve uh improve the world which has its risks. It's certainly a risky strategy but I think that would be the kind of defense defense of it. >> Yeah good point. And I mean it comes down at at that point with the kind of sample size we have you know are we going to really say that Senica's way is not the right way? It's not the cynic way, which is definitely what Epic Tetus is inspired by. >> Um, but I I guess it comes down to the original point, which is like, why are you doing it? Are you trying to work behind the scenes because you genuinely think that's the best way to enact the best outcome or are you doing this because, you know, you don't want to be brave and say the right thing, get thrown in jail because you're afraid of jail. And it takes a pretty advanced person to like tell the difference between those two, >> right? Right. And it's probably the kind of thing where most people were you to do this would be making a mistake, but there's some some set of people, some some set of situations where it's the right play or something. >> Yeah, that sounds right to me. >> Yeah. >> Cool. All right. Well, we made it. I uh I we should revisit the Odyssey at some point. Perhaps we'll do the Iliad. Maybe one of the modern retellings. That could be fun as well. >> Yeah. And I thought this was a really fun book. I listened to it, my first ever audio book, and I thought that was fine because I was like, this is a great way to get into it because this was originally from an oral tradition. Um, but I think worth listening to, worth um, worth engaging with. Um, just for all the reasons we said about really very very influential. You'll see all the references and I always think it's so valuable to see those references and oh, that's actually what happened or that's, oh, actually, uh, how the story went because you see all these parodies of them. Um, but enjoyed it. Would recommend to anybody listening if you haven't already. Um, and like I said, there's the Christopher Nolan film coming out shortly which will so this will be getting very popular. >> Yeah. Yeah, we should do a movie review. >> Compare contrast. Thanks, G. >> Awesome. Thanks, Michael.
