---
title: "An Underrated Stoic Exercise: Circumscribing The Present (Episode 186)"
slug: an-underrated-stoic-exercise-circumscribing-the-present
episode_number: 186
youtube_id: ABkM8Rd2I_8
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ABkM8Rd2I_8
upload_date: 2025-06-03
duration: 20:05
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Hello, welcome to another episode of Stowa Conversations. My name is Michael Trombllay and today's another solo episode where I'll be focusing on a deep dive into one specific exercise of stoicism and that's the exercise of circumscribing the present. So, we'll be talking about what that exercise is, how it works, how it can be helpful for our own lives, and mainly what Marcus Aurelius has to say about it, who's the person I'm taking inspiration from. I wanted to do this episode because this is one of those exercises that I find personally really powerful and and helpful and effective in my own stoic journey, but it's it's one that I didn't come to or start using until relatively late. I think a lot of people you get exposure to things like the dichotomy of control things like momento mori or morati these are quite popular but circumscribing the present something that's been really really helpful for me um but maybe gets a little bit less attention so what is circumscribing the present well this is an exercise called out by the academic and scholar Pierre Hado he talks about as one of the key stoic spiritual exercises is um when we talk about these exercises in general, Hadau calls them spiritual exercises. That's what I focused on, my master's thesis on was this idea. But they're they're really just these exercises of self transformation, right? Stoicism views philosophy as a way of life, which means it's about becoming a better person, but they also view it as a as as a craft. You know, it's similar to carpentry or music playing or a sport. And so in any of those things, you have to practice your skills. It's not something you just want and it happens. So to live well, you need to train. You need to develop your skills of living well. And those are the spiritual exercises, the things that you know, instead of developing your muscles, they develop your spirit. In um Hedau's phrase, you might say that also your character if we wanted to avoid using that that term spirit. And so uh circumcribing the present is one of those. And Marcus Aurelius writes this provides an example of it in the meditations book 12 chapter 3 where he says if you apply yourself to living only that which you are living in other words the present then you can live the rest of your life until your death in peace, benevolence and serenity. And again in book three he reminds us of the same kind of thing. He says in book 3 chapter 10, forget everything else. Keep hold of this alone and remember it. Each of us lives only now, this brief instant. The rest has been lived already or is impossible to see. So what we take from both of those practices is that the key idea of circumscribing the present is to live in the moment. Um, it's to focus only on the present moment. As Marcus says, the rest has already been lived or is impossible to see. And I think of this in some ways as like a variation of the dichotomy of control. Because when we we think about the dichotomy of control which is this idea that some things are up to us and other others aren't and we should focus on the things up to us often we start almost naming like nouns like okay well your career is not up to you so you you shouldn't you shouldn't focus on that your but your but your choices around your career are up to you you know how how deafly you you navigate your professional challenges are up to you so actually focus on that don't focus on you know the title or the external internal thing, but focus on how you address it and approach it because that's up to you. You know, in in a sport, whether or not you win, your team wins, it's not up to you. Lots of other things going on, lots of variables, but the choices you make during the game, those are up to you. And so, when we when we do the dichotomy of control, we often think about it as kind of, you know, types of objects. Object A is up to you, object B isn't up to you. And I think of circumscribing the present as almost the same exercise, but you apply it to really scale rather than content or scale rather than objects. Um, so my choices in the moment are up to me. I I want to pay attention to the present moment because that is the thing that's up to me and how I act to and how I respond to it. But my choices in the past are not up to me and what I will experience and do in the future is not up to me. So it's it's applying that Caleb and I talk about this in terms of perspective. It's it's what you choose to keep in the front of your mind. What you choose to give attention to. It's applying that perspective instead of to well a subsection of objects actually a subsection of time the present moment. That for me is the key to circumscribing the present. That's that's what the exercise is. You know, you can say things like live in the moment or focus on the present. I think those are all true. Th those all capture it as well. But it's this idea of when you really think about what's up to you in stoicism, it's it's what you're experiencing now and it's how you're responding to it. And so what are some of the there there's some aspects of this exercise I want to call out um some nuances to it. But before I get into that, I'll just read the I'll just read the Marxist quote one more time with that context in mind. So again, he says, "If you apply yourself to living only that which you are living, in other words, the present, then you can live the rest of your life until your death in peace, benevolence, and serenity." And again in book three, forget everything else. Keep hold of this alone and remember it. Each of us lives only now, this brief instant. the rest's been lived already or is impossible to see. So again, focusing that attention now, not on the past or the future. So three things I want to call out um about this exercise that adds some nuance to it. And I think it's how it has to do with the bearability of of momentto moment living uncertainty and then this exercise of decomposition. So starting with bear bearability for me the first main advantage of circumscribing the present is that no single moment is unbearable taken as a single moment. It's a way of making almost any situation endurable, something that you are able to persevere through because you're looking at it as one step at a time, one foot in front of the other instead of looking at, wow, I've got this huge mountain to climb and being almost psychologically intimidated or broken by that. You're really just putting one foot in front of the other. This is something Marcus calls out in meditations book 8 chapter 36. He says,"Don't let your imagination be crushed by life as a whole. Don't try to picture everything bad that could possibly happen. Stick with the situation at hand and ask, "Why is this so unbearable? Why can't I endure it?" You'll be embarrassed to answer. Then remind yourself that past and the future have no power over you, only present, and even that can be minimized. Just mark off its limits. I mean, wow. What a what a powerful passage. Here you're seeing that same metaphor I made of don't let your imagination crush you by imagining your whole life. Don't imagine all the things that could go wrong, anything that could go not the way you want it to. Stick with the current moment. And if you stick with the current moment, he has this line, you know, ask yourself why it's so unbearable and you'll be embarrassed to answer. I think because his point is just that it it is bearable, right? Maybe you're really tired right now from work. Maybe you're really stressed about something, but that stress is coming from imagining the moment outside of the present one and the the implications of what's stressing you, the implications of what that what that might have to do with the rest of your life, how it might impact your future. But in the actual moment, you know, sitting here listening to this, you know, not even dayto day, but moment to moment, right? Talking about cir circumscribing maybe five minutes, then then a minute, then just literally just the moment. Those are always bearable. We can always move moment to moment. We can always endure in the single at a single time uh point. It's only when we begin imagining that extending out further that it becomes unbearable. I think about this a lot in terms of sport as well in terms of exercise. If I'm trying to do something really hard, I'm trying to, you know, get a personal best in a run or something. Really, the moment to moment pain is fine. It's this idea of, oh my god, I've got to do this for another 20 minutes. And Marcus is basically applying that to your life. You know, you can you can do okay now. how it's thinking I've got to do this for the rest of the day or I've got another two weeks of this. But the point is it's not really a helpful thought. If that's really something that's not in your control, it's not up to you, right? If it's something you can change, if you can make your life better, if you can remove your stress, do that. It's not about stomis about being the best punching bag possible. But if it really is outside of your control, you know, maybe somebody's um something going on with your family, maybe somebody you care for is sick in a way that you know you're not able to intervene in, then really that recommendation is the the the stoic exercise is to make it bearable by taking it moment by moment. That's something I found um very helpful. Another aspect of circumscribing the present has to do with this idea of of uncertainty. We want to use this exercise when we don't know what will happen in the future. We use it as a way to steal ourselves against that uncertainty because that uncertainty causes a lot of stress, causes a lot of anxiety. Um this is a famous passage from Senica and his letters to Lucilius uh letter 13 parts 4 through 5. Senica says there are more things Lucilius likely to frighten us than there are to crush us. We suffer more often in imagination than in reality. I'm not speaking with you in the stoic strain but in my m milder style. For it is our stoic fashion to speak of all those things which provoke cries and groans as unimportant and beneath notice. But you and I must drop such great sounding words, although heaven knows they are true enough. What I advise you to do is not to be unhappy before the crisis comes. Since it might be that the dangers before you which you pald as if they were threatening you will never come upon you. They are certainly ha they certainly have not yet come. Accordingly, some things torment us more than they ought. Some torment us before they ought, and some torment us when they ought not to torment us at all. We're in the habit of exaggerating or imagining or anticipating sorrow. So circumscribing the present, it's not clear to me that this is really a formalized exercise that has been written down somewhere. We're more calling attention to patterns between exercises or strategies that the Stoics are calling out. And here Senica is is recommending the same thing that Marcus is recommending, but he's more doing it about the anxiety about the future. His point is we feel anxious because we don't know what's going to happen. And Senica's calculus is simple. You want to suffer the exact right amount. If something bad happens, you want to suffer only the badness that is necessary to suffer. Only only the only the pain that is necessary to have. But um we exaggerate, imagine and anticipate sorrow. And because of that, we suffer more in imagination than in reality. We add to it. Um, so he he's pointing out that we we often grieve twice and sometimes we grieve for things that don't even come to pass. So this is when we want to apply the circumscribing the present as an exercise. We want to stop thinking about the things that could happen in the future. Um, again, especially in ways that are not preventable or anticipatable. And if we do think about them, we want to think about them practically and logistically, right? how can I intervene on these things? Um, not again, not wow, I'm so scared about this or this is such a bad thing or I'm I'm so upset that this is going to happen because even if it will happen, there's no point in extending that period of suffering and then sometimes it doesn't even happen. You know, we think about this, everybody has examples of this in their own life. um you know going through periods of change or uncertainty, we want to really just take the things as they come and address them as they come. And so that's the other application of circumscribing the present is this idea of uncertainty. Another aspect of circumcribing the present connects with the exercise of decomposition. Decomposition is something I've talked about before. It's something that Marcus Aurelius advocates for. It's where we view life in hyper realistic terms or descriptive terms. So Marcus talks about going to a festival or a banquet, excuse me, and you know, it's just cooked animal flesh on a table, right? It's like you you don't think of this, oh, somebody's brought this fancy bottle of wine, like, wow, this means I'm so important or I've made it or I'm hanging out with very special people. I'm I'm I'm such a big deal. Instead, it's just like, "No, this is like fermented grape juice." It's this exercise of describing things really literally, which can both humble you and can stop you from getting caught up in these kind of stories or narratives, which can be harmful. And I think we can think of circumcribing the present as a way to apply decomposition to time. So Marcus says in meditations book two part 14, the longest lived and those who will die soonest lose the same thing. The present is all that they can give up since that is all you have and what you do not have you cannot lo lose. So if we described life descriptively if we apply decomposition to life it would be a series of present moments a continuous present. And so that's all you have to gain or lose. Anything above or beyond that is a composition of our own creation. So right now um I'm at home. I'm recording this episode and this is what I'm living and I will continue to live a series of present moments and that will be my cumulative experience of life until I die. And when we start adding these other stories of um you know well I'm I'm I'm going to live to this age and I'm going to enjoy my retirement and I'm going to you know have achieved this uh in my career or I'm going to have these kinds of relationships and travel the world and uh make a name for myself and do these things. When I start imagining that kind of future and then you this is kind of a a sobering thought because Marcus is talking about death here. He's saying when you when you die, if you die prematurely, you're not really losing that future because you're only losing the present moment. You're only losing that moment now as you have it. And so everybody when they die, they they face really the same kind of loss, which is they lose the current present moment they're experiencing. It's a it's it's it's an intense approach to the fear of death, but it's that same kind of idea of when when I fear death, I fear losing the future. And the stoic advice here is with circumscribing the present is that, you know, the future's uncertain. You don't have the future yet. You just have the present moment. And so that should mitigate the fear of death. And that but I think we can we can apply that to other things too, right? When we feel really upset about losing a relationship or a career or any sort of change in our life, we're often grieving or stressing about the, you know, the opportunity that we've lost, the future that could have been. And Marcus' point would be, well, if you applied circumcribing the present, you haven't really lost the future because you only really have this perpetual current moment. And that moment, you know, could be it could be something else. It will change. It could be something just as good. You know, you don't really know yet. You can't really bank on that thing that you feel that you've lost. It was that's a that's a mistake to make, which is a cool way of thinking about it. I think of how, you know, a lot of our stress goes away if we just think of life as a set of continuous moments. And so when something changes in our future, we haven't really lost anything um so much as the current moment has shifted, so to speak. So those are some aspects of circumscribing the present. and I hope you find it useful like I do. To end things off, I'll I'll go back to Marcus's original quote. Um, with this context in mind now that we've broken into it, we've talked about how it can help with bearability. You know, if you're living moment to moment, then you can really push through a lot. You can really endure a lot because moment by moment, life is never quite so quite that bad. And even if it is really bad, it's still going to be less bad than if you viewed it over a week or you know a period of months if you're going through a hard time. It helps with uncertainty. So I think it helps with dealing with this idea of the future when the future is something that's bringing us stress. And then I also talked about decomposition which is really about dealing with I think um these stories we tell ourselves about how great the future's going to be. the stories we tell ourselves about how we're missing out on so much if we in Marcus' case, you know, he's uh lived in the Roman Empire. So, it's kind of a more intense time. He's talking about dying young. But anytime we feel like we've lost out on something, we've missed an opportunity really that's losing sense of the present as well, losing track of really what life is, which is a series of present moments which we still have the ability to influence and determine. And so, with that in mind, I'll go back to Marcus' quotes from the beginning. So again this is book 12 part three. He says if you apply yourself to living only that which you are living in other words the present then you can live the rest of your life until your death in peace benevolence and serenity. And again at book three part 10 forget everything else. Keep hold of this alone and remember it. Each of us lives only now. This brief instant. The rest's already been lived or is impossible to see. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at Stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions.
