---
title: "Ancient and Modern Myths with Michael Fontaine (Episode 203)"
slug: ancient-and-modern-myths-with-michael-fontaine
episode_number: 203
youtube_id: hphgIKhIQaA
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hphgIKhIQaA
upload_date: 2025-09-30
duration: 54:44
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to STOA conversations. My name is Caleb Monttoveros and today I am speaking with Michael Fontaine. Michael is a professor of classics at Cornell University. His latest work is How to Have Willpower, an ancient guide to not giving in. and he also has a number of other works uh for that Princeton University Press series, How to Get Over a Breakup, How to Grieve, How to Tell a Joke, and I'm sure a number of others. Uh thanks so much for joining. >> Thanks so much for having me. It's it's a real pleasure to be here. So I came across your work as as I was just saying because I saw this uh combination of interests in the classical world of course the world of classics but also the modern psychiatrist and philosopher Thomas Saw who talks a lot about some of these modern ideas we have about things like mental illness but also discusses themes the Stoics are very keen on when it comes to freedom. um uh and agency. But I think maybe the best way to kick things off is to think about some modern and classical myths. So you have this quote about psychiatry and mythology that I think is uh a a great starting point. So it goes as follows. Psychiatry and mythology offer us competing explanations of human woe. The good news is that those ancient myths can help us identify and cut through some recent myths that dominate the world today. One myth of our times is that everything really old is obsolete. Another is that mental illnesses are the result of chemical imbalances or brain diseases and that drugs called medicines are the best way to treat them. So could you say more about this this idea of myth uh when it comes to classical world thinking about mental illnesses or perhaps a lower level we might think as mental anguish um and some of these modern stories today we talk about you know the source of aros. >> Sure. So you know myth has a couple of different meanings in Greek itself. Mythos just means a story. And so every kid gets a big book of Greek mythology, right? I gave my kids uh the Delair's book of Greek myths and everybody's they love that stuff. And the Greeks themselves regarded those probably as legendary stories on the order of like I don't know King Arthur. Was King Arthur real? Maybe he was real. Maybe he wasn't real. Uh so that's one kind of myth. Uh but another kind is the kind that uh you sort of teased up a little bit when when Thomas S wrote a famous book called the myth of mental illness or I was alluding to some of that in the quote you just gave and now what we're talking about here these are beliefs uh we are talking about uh explanatory systems that people believe with all their heart now you get this in religious contexts uh where people you know as a matter of faith as ardent belief and so forth they might maybe somebody believes Jesus came back from the dead, went up into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the father. Some people believe that. Other people obviously don't. Some people think and they believe firmly that you know there's only one God and Muhammad is his prophet. Now those are the kind of unshakable core beliefs that if you don't share them you would call a myth. Uh now uh let's say I don't know you're not a religious person and you sit there and you feel smug and say haha those benited people with their beliefs you know they're deluded the innocent sheep they're being taken advantage of that's one way of thinking about it s and I were both talking about what we call psychiatric myths and in the United States in most of the western world uh it is a 100% ironclad uh article of belief that human woe depression or schizophrenia and so forth that that is somehow the process something went wrong inside of your biological body right you have a broken brain you have a chemical imbalance you have uh a tendency uh to something um and if you really believe that so it's on the scientific model you're going to use scientific looking ways to try and fix that now if somebody like me comes along and is not a scientist and says you know but some of this is not really adding up I don't think This makes sense. Uh people were going to regard me as a heretic just as dangerous and benited and uh a brainwasher on the order that all those people 400 years ago were burned at the stake for. You know, in Europe, they burned all these witches and so forth. Uh the non-believers. So that is kind of the myth that that I'm most interested in. Where do these beliefs come from? Why are do people cling to them so so uh passionately? And what can we do about it? What if they're not correct? Right? Uh maybe they are correct but the evidence at this point is looking pretty bad I think for some of those things. >> Yeah absolutely. If we think about those um you know these ideas of depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, what were the stories or beliefs that people had about such things or similar things in the ancient world then? you know, how did they deal with what today we might call depression, anxiety, or some other mental illness? >> Yeah. So, these are the things I talked about uh I wrote about a little bit in the introduction of this new book, How to Have Willpower. And I was really happy to have the chance to do that. Uh the overwhelming evidence uh is that they thought about them in the same way basically that people have always thought about them, but uh in different proportions. And there's only really three ways of thinking about these things. uh why do we do something bad or stupid? Right? Uh one uh possibility is that you got a brain disease. So you see that in the ancient world. You see Hypocrates and the medical writers and they believe that you know something has gone wrong with your brain and that's why you're hearing voices and we're going to fix it with some chemical means. They used a drug called hellaore. Uh then you have other people that come along and they say well you've been bewitched. uh you know somebody cast a hex on you and if you go and sacrifice these piglets then you'll be purified. So that's what we call exorcism, right? We're familiar with that uh within the religious tradition of the middle ages. Uh but then I think the one that'll appeal to most of the listeners here today is the third model and that is the sort of you got problems in your life. Nobody doubts that but they're problems in your life. They're problems in living. That's what SAS called them. There's not a problem with your body. your body is working okay. You are not the victim of somebody putting a curse on you. You have problems that uh you're going to have to take responsibility for. And if you do that, and nobody's saying it's going to be easy, but if you do that, you can self-empower and you can make a change that will get you out of this depression. So, I quoted the three different major philosophical schools in the intro there. So, I've got a nice quote from Cicero from his Tuscul disputations, which is a fantastic book. Uh I don't know if you've talked about it on the podcast, but you should. Uh it's from book two of the Tusculins. And in there he says, you know, these problems we have are like demons from hell. They're fury. They're like crazy women sent up from hell to plague us. He says, but they're basically stupidity. You're making stupid choices. But it's not your body. It's not like an epileptic seizure, right? Where you have no agency over that. you have agency over whether you're buying lottery tickets or you're buying booze or you can't stop watching porn, you can't stop checking your phone and all the things that we're familiar with. Um or or you commit a crime of some kind. Uh and then you see the same thing in the Epicurans and you see it uh most profoundly I think with the Stoics. Um when you get to Epictitus, you get to the handbook, the famous sentence at the very beginning where he says, you know, you can't really control event. You don't control events. It's not up to us. But what is up to us is how we react to those events. I bet that's a sentence, you know. I bet everybody listening knows that sentence. And you say, "Man, that's such a simple one-s sentence thing, but my god is that profound." >> Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, I suppose when you think about the stoic model with uh the way some people talk about depression or anxiety today, it's almost if it comes at you from the unconscious and immediately just determines your fate as it were without any sort of intermediary. >> I want to stop you on right there. It's it's the word you just used is exactly it determines everything. It's coming out. You have no responsibility for it. Right. say that it's somehow that it's like uh like a congenital disease like like the type of diabetes, right? Where you didn't do anything wrong. You were born this way or maybe you're born missing a finger or something like that. That's not your fault. And so there is this unshakable belief today in exactly that that it's all determined. >> But so this is the question Sas and I and some of us are so interested in. Is our behavior determined? I mean, do we have causes for our behavior or do we have reasons for our behavior? Right. Yeah. And I think there's the Stoics are interesting here because fundamentally they they think everything is determined. But about this specific these sorts of specific cases, they would certainly insist that if you have, you know, a particular sensation, impression, what have you, that still needs to go through given that we're rational creatures, our own own reflection. And there's a sense in which I think that they they would say, you know, we have reasons for our behavior because we're choosing to ascent to or not our impressions. You know, you you're embracing anxious thoughts or something of this sort. So, you know, maybe you you have an inbuilt tendency to have those more than others, but uh that's a different matter from I think where some people really have almost a fatalistic type view. you know, you have this condition, what's called a condition, therefore this is what the story of your life is going to look like. >> I think that's exactly right. I think you explain the stoic sort of I don't know if metaphysics is the right word or not, but the way you explain it, I think it's exactly correct. They did have what strikes me as a pretty reasonable view, right? Some things that are easy for me are going to be hard for you and vice versa. I mean, all human experience uh shows us that some things are easier for some people than they are for others. And you know it's luck of the draw. Uh and but that doesn't mean that it's mechanistic >> and you do see that you know that is said we're not billiard balls on the pool on the pool table getting knocked around. You know it's not the case that the big bang set every atom in motion and we are everything we're doing through now is just going through the motions in a predetermined course. This fatalistic sort of thing like you said. Uh now the stoics have that sort of soft version. The epicurans as you probably know go even further. they say the total choice. Uh, Epicurans were sort of libertarian in a lot of their views. Um, but what you just said, I think is probably the modern view, right? This idea that, you know, uh, I don't know. I went last night, uh, I was invited to the student cafeteria here and they had this carrot cake sitting out there. My god, it looked good. >> And I thought, boy, I would love to have a slab of that. I mean, the slices were gigantic. And I'm like, no, I don't really. But so, so other people, they're not even tempted by that stuff. They don't want it. They're like, nah, I don't. It doesn't look that good to me. And I'm sitting there and I've got my one of my kids with me and the poor kid is just like a slave to the carrot cake. He can't pull himself away from it. And so it's clear, right, that like different stuff is out there and we have different temptations. So I talked in the book a little bit about that, right? Uh and this is SAS characterized it the same way that we are tempted by things. And that sounds religious right there, doesn't it? Uh if you go to a psychiatrist, they're not going to talk about temptation. Uh we have different words we use today. We might talk about orientation. You know, you you have a certain leaning or an orientation or something, but temptation is a religious word and nobody wants to use it. Um, but I'm not sure it's all that different. >> Yeah. I think it's it's related to another religious word that the ancients focus on quite a lot or that we perceive as religious virtue. You know, I think that has that that connotation today of maybe a moralistic preacher or something of this sort. >> Abs. Yeah. They uh so I talk a tiny bit about that in the book as well because I I was tormented over how to translate the second text in the book which is the battle of the vices and the virtues and I'm asking everybody I know I said would you say virtue today I mean what happened well the word got Christianized in the ancient world in the beginning it meant what it meant like awesomeness prowess it was courage on the battlefield and then the philosophers brought that into the moral realm right how can you be courageous in life but when uh Christianity took over the state became the state religion of Rome. The whole word got reinterpreted as this idea of like obedient behavior, right? So now if you say virtue, a lot of people were thinking about like a a young woman who's never had sex. Uh that I think that tends to be the primary uh you know word that springs to mind because of course it sounds like virgin, but it's they're unrelated. Uh but this idea that virtue should be like strength or greatness. Uh I think that would be a better translation for the ancient words than the ones we're using today. Yeah, that I think that's a great point and uh you know we're trying to bring back virtue as a as a concept on on this podcast a humble effort but uh I think something that's useful about say like the stoic taxonomies of you know that they have other sub virtues and such is how they focus on skills that we wouldn't necessarily call moral. It's it's not merely what we might call following moral rules or you know being nice. It's also around competence or you know you think about different elements of prudence uh about thinking well really ethics in the sense of living well you know this idea of what it is to have a good life and there's a sense in which the well I guess there are different ways to say this there's a sense in which you could describe that as a moral project but I think there are other ways in which people use it the term think about morality in a much narrower way in which the ancient vision is much broader than That sounds right to me. I you're you're reminding me of a bunch of things uh that I do in courses here. So I bring in Cicero's text on duties a lot and we talk about the four cardinal virtues, right? Wisdom, justice, uh what is it? Fortitude, moderation. And I said, you know, is it moral to talk about these things? Well, when he uses a word like that, yeah, he means what you're talking about, conduct, deport, how you're going to relate to the world, what's going to give you a happy life. And um I've been teaching college a long time about 25 years. And in the beginning when I started most of the students were had come from religious upbringings. >> So they were getting this stuff from in those days it would be church or temple most of them. But what has happened uh now we have an enormous number of secular students. And when I asked them is where do you get your ideas of how to live a good life or make a good choice from it? Most of them tell me I just kind of shoot from the hip. You know my parents we didn't really talk about this in any discreet fashion. And so I said, 'Boy, we got to dust off Cicero on duties and put this in your life. This thing is a guide to good living. Uh, and Cicero Tuscuins, same thing. It's written for an audience of like 19, 20, 21 year old guys. Uh, you know, and so the things you're talking, yeah, these are the virtues. Virtues is just it becomes a misnomer for people, especially because they think you're thumping a Bible or something when you use that word. Not on this podcast, it sounds like, but in general, you know, um, what is wisdom? What is critical thinking? we might call that today, right? Our prudence to hear that these are oldfashioned words, but they are great values if we can explain them to people. >> I suppose going back then to our the original opening thinking about mental illness, causes of mental anguish. uh how do you think about this idea of I think today many people like to talk about these things without inserting value judgments for these sorts of things. So, but of we've, you know, we've already wandered into talking about the virtues and it seems like the classical perspective can't really evade this issue of making judgments about your own or someone else's behavior even when it comes to say you know the someone has a kind of agorophobia or something like this they don't don't want to go outside they have a condition of something like this I think many would be inclined to perhaps not issue judgment about cases like that or other cases is whereas the perhaps the ancient perspective would you know how do you think about that >> I think about it in libertarian terms to be honest uh which doesn't mean I'm necessarily a libertarian but uh the first question I'd ask is somebody coming to me and asking for help or are they being brought to me by their family members which the second is overwhelmingly the psychiatric scenario you know the spouse is unhappy the parents are unhappy somebody's saying you know the family is saying there's something wrong with you there's something wrong with you know with Mike he he needs help and Mike himself is saying I there's nothing wrong with me. I don't need help. And so that becomes the classic scenario. S harped on this theme endlessly and I think he was correct and I think you see it in the classical literature too. But okay, if somebody comes to me and asks for help and they say, you know, my I'm I'm depressed or I'm I'm afraid to go out in large crowds or something. So if you're asking my advice, I'm going to have to make a value judgment. And this brings you right back to Epictitus, right? I mean, what is it you're actually afraid of? But but I don't think uh and maybe we could work through that right sort of you know what is bugging you so much this is I I'm I'm certain you must already know this uh from Donald Robertson and others right stoicism and CBT are the same thing so we have to in a way it's all about value judgments you see this in Senica and so I could try and persuade somebody say you know I think maybe you're exaggerating this you know if you look out in the window the sky is still blue isn't it I mean the grass is still green and things are going to be okay or or Maybe you're not. Maybe you're not taking it seriously enough. Um, but for me, the test case scenario then would be vice. And this is the other word I struggled with when I was translating in this book. You know, vice. Uh, I always think of Miami Vice used to be a TV show, right? But what is vice? What makes somebody do something that to everybody else looks so self-destructive? >> Uh, whatever the vice is, right? Why are people gambling in Las Vegas when you know over time the house is going to win? Why do people smoke cigarettes when you know it causes cancer? Why do people drive drunk? Why do people have risky sex? It goes on and on and on. Those questions all of them are value judgments, right? Because by and large the person well this is this is exact this is exactly the hardest the scenario. If you don't believe they have something wrong with their body, you have to assume they're making a stupid choice. And if they do have something wrong with their body, they've had a stroke or they, you know, they got knocked in the head or something, in that case, you'd say, "No, they're probably not making a choice or something really is wrong in that case." But if you don't look at their brain, you don't know if they got a brain problem. Uh, and so, uh, the evidence to me, absent a brain scan or a giant spike sticking out of the top of somebody's head, I'd say this is what the person wants to do. I'll give you another example. It'll be controversial, but it's pretty funny. Uh, I grew up in New Orleans. Uh, I don't know if you ever been down there. When when we think about Vice, New Orleans is ground zero. It's Mecca, right? Everybody wants to go down there and have a good time. And I was down there. I must have been about 17 years old, 16, 17, which was underage, but that was the way it was. We're out on Bourbon Street. That's the main district. And uh, one half of Bourbon Street was all the straight bars. The other half was all the gay bars. And there's a spot in the middle where they met. It used to be Lucky Pierre and I can't remember which one that went, but right in the middle there would be a bunch of guys dressed up as women wearing uh outrageous lingerie. They might be wearing gigantic leather apparatuses and all this stuff. And so, of course, my friends and I were drinking. We're good little, you know, kid boys. I went up to one of them and I said, you know, why are you doing that? Why are you dressed like that? The guy, I'll never forget, he looks at me and he said, honey, I like this. And I thought, you know what? Yeah, that actually is probably really all there is to it. Like, I mean, I'm not going to wear an outfit like that. But if this is what you want, that's what you want. I There's nothing wrong with you. We just want different things. Anyway, I don't I don't know if that's outrageous or common sense to you, but that's kind of how I think about these things. >> Gotcha. Gotcha. So when you say libertarian, you mean sort of politically libertarian, a kind of live and let live might be a little too uh glit perhaps, but something close to that. >> Yeah, definitely. I don't even know what other kind of libertarian you would mean, but sure, I should uh clarify that. Uh and and again, that doesn't mean I am a libertarian when it comes to actual real world political beliefs. I I think a lot of it's unworkable, but I do try to inflex as much as I can in letting people live the way they want to live, letting people make the choices they want to make, even if I think they're totally misguided. Uh I would not get judgy about that. I'll give you another example. I went out to breakfast on Sunday and most of the people in the restaurant were morbidly obese, gigantic. They were heavily overweight and they're ordering enormous amounts of food with milkshakes and stuff on the side and all that. But what I'm not going to say something about that. Of course, it's rude beyond belief and I don't think it's productive, but that also uh I don't think we ought to legislate that away >> uh and say, "Yeah, know the government's going to put you on a diet." So, that's how I think about some of these things. >> Yeah, maybe a social libertarianism is slightly closer. >> And yeah, in that sense, you know, uh but I gota I should probably clarify. I don't think that makes a lot of people happy. uh to say I think I think it makes them happy on their own terms but it makes a lot of other people much unhappier uh and so uh you know for example if you the libertarian argument I've always endorsed that uh if you don't have any dependence on your income tax then you should be able to take any drugs you want but the moment you do right like if you let's say you got married or you have kids the libertarian argument that you should be able to put any substance in your body that you want that strikes me as totally wrong. Absolutely wrong. Uh but nobody likes that argument very much. >> Yeah. I think it's uh I well I think if you connecting this to saw saw of course and a number of other thinkers through our history has some nice lines about freedom you know it's the we want it when we don't have it and then as soon as we get autonomy we want to push it off to someone else. I think if if you give freedom to yourself, that comes with responsibility. If you give it to others, then you can't tell them how to live as much, and you're risking, you know, your community turning on to ways you don't want it to be. >> That's exactly right. I mean, I I I I put it the other way. I say blame. We're all trying to pin it on something else. Uh right. I mean, we give somebody freedom. They make a choice. It doesn't work out. First thing everybody's is say, "Well, that wasn't my fault." alter you look for some external cause. Freedom doesn't make a lot of people happy, but that I still think we ought to try and give as much of it as we can. >> Mhm. >> Um, and I think the ancients thought about it by and large the same way. >> Yeah. I think the I think certainly the the Stoics were aligned with these ideas of responsibility and but perhaps they weren't as liberal in letting people live how they at least there are many different Stoics but I I could see at least some of them having stronger views about maybe you need to shape the poets in a particular way and that uh you know that that's going to require forcing people to have a certain kind of life or something of that sort. >> Yeah. The Stoics I think were not very libertarian, right? Uh the and um Cicero uh at least criticized over and over. He criticized the Epicurans for their libertarianism. He uh you know, you read Lucriccius and you think, "Oh, this stuff sounds awesome." Right? Or you read Epicurus' letter to Heroditus, you think, "Oh, that's fantastic." But Cicero over and over in his different writings, he said, "There's something wrong with this philosophy, right? This uh I got mine philosophy. I'm going to check out. I'm not going to participate in the community. Um, let people do their own thing even if they wind up dead in the streets. He says that's wrong. You, that's why he I think that's why he wrote on duties. He says this, he's got this famous line. He attributes it to Plato, but Plato never said it as far as we know. You know, we're not born for ourselves alone. And uh I think the Stoics agree with that, right? All the great sto the Romans by the time you get to the stoic period all the great heroes are stoics people who get involved somehow in in politics get involved in the community whether that would mean live and let live on any kind of private sphere I don't think I can't think of any examples one way or the other for that >> yeah I suppose there's Msonius Rufus is the the Roman sto Mius Rufus has some strong opinions about you know diet furniture, gender roles, uh, and such. That's a >> You're catching me by You're catching me by surprise cuz I haven't read Monius Rufus in >> 20 years at least. I It's not on my shelf. I mean, I'm aware of who the guy is, but I I've never gone back to that. >> So, you you're the expert on that one for sure. >> Yeah. Someone remarked to me that, you know, they call Mousius Rufus, the Roman Socrates, but I'm not sure. He wasn't sure what that said about the Romans. That's what he said. >> Yeah. Um, but I'll have to I'll have to have a look at some of that because that that does interest me. He's giving like diet recommendations and behavioral recommendations. >> Yeah. It's almost like uh I mean it's lectures to younger men. It's a pretty similar situation to Epictitus, but uh yeah, he has uh lines about almost a sort of Spartan type view about what you should eat, what you should have. Um but he also has views about uh he's a sort of pro-natalist I suppose something else he says you know you ought to have children when you have children you should take care of them. >> That strikes me as pretty reasonable. It's funny you bring that last point up because I did a previous book a few years ago. It's called How to Grieve and it was about uh sis the death of Cicero's daughter. >> I don't know if you know the if you remember the story. You know she was >> what was she uh 32 years old or something or 23 years old. I having one of those moments. But she was young and she gave birth to a baby. The baby died. She died right after Cicero fell to pieces. It was terrible. And when the book came out, I got emails from a few people in this anti-natalist community. And they were very interested in in this question, you know, should we never have kids because it, you know, it's life is nothing but misery. >> Well, you know, I I don't really accept the premise that life is nothing but misery. Whether you want to have kids or not is different. I agree that it's an involuntary experience to be born, but whether life is so horrible and so full of woe that you want to opt out of the experience, I just don't know. >> Well, another thing we can hop into that I think we've touched on already, but say some more things about is this connection between Epicurionism and these uh Sian style views. So, uh, I think we've already touched on sort of the Epicurian view as Cicero critiques it perhaps because he sees it as avoiding the life of politics. But, uh, what else could we could we say in the Epicurian's favor? >> Well, I think a very great deal can be said in the favor in the of the philosophy as we read it. I mean, it's the foundation of our entire scientific modern secular worldview. Uh I don't know have you do you talk a lot about Epicurionism here on the podcast? >> Yeah, we talk about a decent amount. We could give it a Let's give a blurb though for those who maybe are unfamiliar. It's a good idea. >> So Epicurus, he lived uh what in the 4th century BCE in Greece. He went off as a young man from Samos. He came back with a complete philosophy. We don't know where he got it, how he did it. He claimed that he made the whole thing up himself. There were other people that thought maybe that wasn't totally true. Uh but what is it? It is basically an atheistic worldview. It's a belief that the only thing in the universe is empty space and a whole bunch of atoms swirling all around knocking into each other. And as they knock into each other, they form piles. We call those piles things like plants and trees and planets and human beings. Uh and from this simple cosmological principle, he deres an entire code of how to live your life for maximal happiness. Uh so the stoics pre what do they prize? They prize sort of virtue. That's their top their sum bonum the best thing in the world. But the uh the Apigurans took the opposite view head and a pleasure bodily pleasure. This idea that the best thing in the world is be free from pain. And boy is that tough. I often ask groups of students would you rather and Cisro does this in the Tusculins. He says all right young man would you guys uh would you uh is dying the worst thing in the world or is pain the worst thing in the world? People say yes. He says, "Oh, that's probably pretty shameful, isn't it?" And he gives him some counter examples. And so that's Epicuranism. And if you really do believe that pain is the worst thing in the world, there's all kinds of ways you're going to act in connection with that belief, right? I mean, you would watch your grandmother carded away by evil men and you would say, "Well, as long as it's not me." I mean, Stoics would say, "What is wrong with you?" And they would jump in and they say, "I'm probably going to get shot. I might get killed, but at least I'm going to save grandma. And that's, you know, th that's the fundamental split in these philosophies. But in practice, I'm not sure they always look totally different, right? Everybody's trying to be free from pain. Everybody's trying to be happy. And it's a question of how you get there, right? So, this is kind of what Sas was getting at in his philosophy. Uh, if you believe that you the problems in your life are a result of, let's say, a chemical imbalance, right? you got too much serotonin, then what are you going to do to try and fix that? Well, you're going to take SSRIs. You're going to take serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and you're going to take those every day for the rest of your life. And the belief that you have a deficiency along the same lines that a diabetic has an insulin deficiency. But if you don't believe that or you doubt that, you say, "Well, I wonder maybe that's just masking the problem and maybe the problem is other things and I've got to make some changes that can be very painful. Maybe I need to get divorced. Maybe I need to get married." Uh either way, everybody's trying to get maximal happiness. Uh and so from the epicurian point of view, they say you take that pill, but it's not going to fix your problem. Uh it might it's going to change the way you feel, but that's not not going to medicate a problem away. If the problem is you don't want to be married anymore, >> um or something like that, right? Or you wanted to get into an Ivy League college and it didn't work. I'd be pretty unhappy about that, too. I see students like that all the time. And I I'm just not sure the fix for that is a pill. Uh it wasn't caused by any kind of deficiency. Um so the Epicurans though they're very rationalistic, very evidence-based. Uh you don't need to, if you read Lucriccius, it's the great poem. You don't need to know anything uh to get started with the philosophy. He says we're going to start with the basic principle, right? Is air empty? Looks empty. But what what is wind? When it strikes your cheek, you feel something. What is that telling you? It can't be empty. Something's there. You just can't see it. And so, you know, wind, what does it move ships across the water? And so, he appeals constantly to your senses, to things we can see in the real world, and he tries to deduce the principles. Um, the Stoics are a little bit different about that, which is one that's a bone I have to pick with stoicism. I love their coping strategies. I love them. I think they're fantastic. The metaphysics keep changing. you you go from one finger to the next and you you get a totally different explanation. Maybe not totally different, but you get different explanations for some of these things. So, the Epicurans, I think they, you know, they looked at nature, they studied nature. Uh, Epicur, yeah, maybe you know this already. Uh, his name in Hebrew means atheist. Uh, and in if you read Dante, he's burning in hell for saying that the soul dies with the body. But that that was their great principle. the the Epicurians said, "There is no life after death. All we have is the here and now." So, we got to be happy now. How are we going to get there? Uh and this was of course uh unpopular with Christianity. The books disappeared in antiquity, but then they were spectacularly rediscovered in the Renaissance and that sort of helped launch the scientific revolution. Amazing stuff really. >> Yeah. I think on on one hand the Stoics and the Epicurans of course are philosophical rivals. Uh but today and of course even some of the the Stoics are very fond of quoting Epicurius most notably Senica. Uh and and today I certainly say they have a lot in common especially when it comes to practice. uh since you know the Epicurans also end up focusing not on hedenism and sort of the selfish sense but uh on virtue is sort of the path to living a pleasant pleasurable life. So that's exactly correct, right? I mean, uh, the their pleasure, uh, this a bit of a dodge by Epicurus. He had a little bit of charlatan about him. I think there's no question. But he said, "The greatest thing in the world is pleasure." Now, that's that's going to shock everybody, right? If you go home and tell your mom you want to devote the rest of your life to pleasure, she's not going to be happy. But he says, "But no, hold on, folks. We're going to redefine pleasure. Pleasure is like a 16 cup at 7-Eleven. You take it over to the the the soda fountain and you fill the thing up with your favorite beverage. When it hits the top, you that is pleasure. You have maxed out on pleasure. Anything beyond that, if you keep holding the lever down and stuff starts flowing all over the floor, that is literally what they call redundant pleasure. You don't need that stuff. And so he went on to define redefine pleasure as pretty obvious living. You know, not so different from what I heard you saying about Monius there a few minutes ago. He says, uh, you know, is it pleasurable to eat carrot cake? Well, obviously the stuff tastes good. If you're going to have the big slab of that stuff, but how are you going to feel in an hour when you get the sugar crash, right? How are you going to feel uh in three weeks if you eat that stuff every day of the week and your past fit? So, they they are philosophical rivals. You're correct. But I think they're aiming in a lot of ways at the same goal. >> It's pretty. By the way, here's a I got a trivia question for you. Do you know where they uh do you know where they team up in world literature? There's a famous passage where the Epicurans and the Stoics, they kind of team up. I guess >> I don't think so. No, I nothing immediately comes to mind. >> I want you to pop open the Bible, go to Acts of the Apostles, chapter 17. And in there, that's when St. Paul arrives in Athens, same agar where Socrates used to hang around. And he preaches, says the Bible, the good news of Jesus and the resurrection. And the Stoics and Epicurans come up, they say, "Who the hell is this guy? What is he preaching? He seems to have some kind of strange new gods, which is bad news, right? Because that's what they executed Socrates for." So, uh, Paul kind of he makes a couple converts and then he gets out of town, but it's the only place in the Bible where they appear. >> Yeah, that's a I suppose there's there is a little bit of that link between ancient Greek philosophy and uh and Paul, of course. Oh, I I myself think it's enormous in the the Gospel of Luke and the Acts of the Apostles. They were written in Greek. Luke seems to both by Luke and he seems to have been intimately familiar with Greek philosophy. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Another place where the I suppose the Stoics and Epicurans align and depart from Christianity is on their ideas of death and seen it perhaps not as something to be feared. And I think the Stoics maybe had of some disagreements about the nature of the afterlife and such, but in general thought that look, you know, death is and indifferent and you know, sometimes it's choiceworthy really. It's what's preferable to to your current circumstances. >> Yeah, that gets into an extremely delicate topic, doesn't it? Right. I mean, and Cicero talks about this again in the the uh the Tuscuan disputation. Is it the Tuscans or the Dotaur Deor? things to tuscul but he talks about you know if death is not the worst thing in the world should you choose it and that boy now you're getting into some really delicate stuff sas we were talking about sass wrote multiple books on the right to die grim stuff is very it's a very hard topic to talk about um I think it's I think it's a little irresponsible to preach death and that sort of thing but the stoics have a point right I mean we die what happens next well We don't know what happens next. Nobody's ever actually definitively come back and said, "Oh, yeah, man. It's fantastic out there." Or, "No, it's horrible. Repent now and change your I mean, it's never come back with unam." And nobody's ever come back with unambiguous evidence that's so cogent that everybody has to believe. Whereas the Epicurans said, "No, uh, we don't think there's anything after death for these scientific reasons." And so when you die, your molecules have to get reused as worm food or whatever it's going to be. Uh, and so, um, there's no heaven, but there's also no hell. So, you should get over all these, you know, the fire and brimstone you're hearing from the priests because those people, they don't know either and they're just trying to scare you for their own advantage and so forth. Um, but both of those are empowering philosophies, right? >> Uh, I think that that's what I like about both of them very much. Uh, >> Epicuranism saying if we can free your mind of this idea you're going to go to hell, you'll live a totally better life. And the stoic saying, well, you know, death is really not the worst thing in the world. We should when it times come, there's no getting around it, so you got to just accept it. You know, uh I find the the the latter in particular very comforting. I don't know how other people feel about that, but you know, I didn't ask to be born. I had no say so in that. So, I got no say so in dying. Well, once I can accept that again, I can orient my life in ways that maximize what I want to do. >> Yeah, I think so. And um I think there's this uh there's certainly this alignment in seeing the fear of death as something to be approached rationally and and addressing that as part of the philosophical life. >> You know what you would be fascinated by that uh is this book I did how to grieve. Uh what is it? It's a renaissance recreation of a lost text by Cicero. uh Cicero wrote a book called the constellation when his daughter died and uh it went it was studied for centuries but it went missing at some point probably in the 4th century and it was recreated from fragments and quotations in the Renaissance and in it uh there's a passage where uh drawing on ancient philosophy Cicero reviews all the rational evidence or arguments for uh death being indifferent or a bad thing and so on he says well why do people fear death so much you know and he goes some people seem to think that the process of dying is going to be horribly painful. He says that that might be true, but the evidence doesn't really support that. We see people sometimes die with a smile on their face, right? Or they just freeze and their eyes are open and there's no evidence that they there's this horrific pain. He says, "All right, that's number one." He goes through about six or seven or eight of these different arguments why we shouldn't be afraid of death. And he was not an epicurion for any of this either, right? So he's just said, "But the process of dying is not scary. being dead probably is not going to be scary. He believed in heaven, which is kind of an amazing idea. And he gets into that in the text. Uh are you familiar at all with this argument, by the way? He says, "What happens when we die?" He says, "Well, it's possible that our soul just scatters to the wind." It's possible, but that the evidence is against that. He says, he says, "What happens to a body when it somebody dies? The body goes cold." What does that mean? There's a loss of heat. Well, the loss of heat seems to be the same thing as the loss of the soul. What happens to heat? Where does it go? Well, it rises. Everybody knows heat rises. How far does it rise? Well, it's going to rise till it hits equilibrium. And when it hits equilibrium, that's heaven because all the other dead souls have risen to the same place. We're going to be there together. And it's an amazing thought. I mean, it you tell people this, they usually they smile and they say, "Oh, that's kind of cute." And then you say, "Well, what's wrong with that argument?" They say, "You know, actually, I'm not sure I got good arguments against that. That actually is kind of an interesting argument." >> Yeah, I'm not familiar with that. passage in Cicero, but it does seem to map on nicely to the Stoics's picture of the soul as a sort of a kind of fire or breath being a material thing. And I think that would totally maps onto their metaphysics as well. >> That's right. The Stoics, I think, have the the soul for them is not material. Do I have that right? I I've got a colleague here who swears the Stoics were all materialists, but I don't think that's correct. I don't know. >> Well, I suppose the technical word for it sometimes is corporealists. >> Yeah. So they thought that with some exceptions maybe a little bit of an asterisk everything is a body. >> Yeah. >> Uh and I I do believe they would say the soul is also a body. But they they also left some space for things like void >> and um what they called lecta which is sort of like the meaning meanings of uh what we say perhaps. So you know you have the say a statement uh and then its meaning and the lecta is is not a body. It's something it's something different something symbolic. >> Um >> okay >> so it is trickier than I than I remember it being. I mean it's tricky already but it already sounds trickier than I recall. Yeah. If they say it's corporeal though that does point to a uh yeah materialist point of view. I I should have a look at some of this again. But but Marcus Marcus Aurelius sometimes gets critiqued because he's doesn't take as strong of a a line on this because he does a few things that sound more I suppose platonic as it were about the soul. So that might be where uh some of the some of what you're thinking about. >> Well, I just find it interesting. I mean we have the word soul so it presupposes that something exists, right? >> But it's not clear that there is any such thing as a soul. Uh, Voltater says this in the Enlightenment and if uh I don't know if do you guys ever get into the Enlightenment in your >> you know I don't I don't think we've had any episodes I'm trying to think about enlightenment type figures. I don't believe so. >> So I should got to be your next protocol. Maybe not tomorrow but soon. >> I've got more Cisero to cover though. >> Okay. All right. Uh oh, you got to bring on Quintis Curteas. He'll talk to you about Cicero. He's the best that's out there right now. Uh I don't know if you're familiar with him. He's translated Cicero. He's the philosopher of Twitter and so forth. Um he's amazing. Uh but in the enlightenment, especially in France, you get to writers like Voltaare and Dalbear and uh who else did row and so forth, but but Voltater in particular, he he wrote the philosophical encyclopedia and Anony says the soul. What is a soul? Well, nobody's ever actually seen a soul. So, how do we know this thing actually is a thing at all? And the reason I bring this up is because Sas wrote uh a number of books, but one in particular is very similar. uh he said the meaning of mind right like what is mind do you have a mind is the mind the same thing as the soul uh and he concluded there's no such thing as a mind as a physical entity and there's no such thing as a soul as a physical entity but mind in particular mind is a verb right so we what do you do you mind your manners you mind what you're doing it's a way of saying you're paying attention to something you are attending to that but if you carve up somebody's brain on the labbotomy t or the the the as a cadaavver you're not going to find the mind it's not a part of the brain. Uh and a lot of people have a lot of trouble with this argument. Uh they maybe never thought about it or they say nah that's crazy. Of course our brain's responsible for everything. And he agreed with that. He said the brain is the the hardware, but that doesn't mean you have a mind. It doesn't mean you have a soul. Mhm. >> Um, and so I'm not surprised that the Stoics and everybody else has got different explanations for what the soul is because nobody's ever seen one, you know, how big is a soul? What color is the soul? I mean, these are elementary questions, but can you draw a picture of a soul? What would it look like? Nobody can do that. >> Yeah. The stoics also have some interesting disagreements about uh sort of the faculty of reason and sort of how large it is whether it's this entire faculty or just the part of the faculty I suppose that's just responsible for asenting or not to impressions. So they talk about the hegemonicon which includes the thing that receives impressions, reflects on them and ascends to it. Uh and I think that's probably a standard view. That's sort of what you are. Maybe they would say, some would say that was maps on to what we some how we sometimes use the word soul. But Epictitus has probably a narrower view where he thinks you're just that bit that does the thinking which I think maybe is a little bit closer to to saw where the the prohyus the that thing that ascends or doesn't to impressions and then sort of that's it a very a very small picture of of what you are. >> Yeah. I the problem I have with all this this is all mythmaking. Uh to me these are all great myths. You know, of course, Freud had a completely different view of the same phenomena. Uh he imagined the mind is like an iceberg, right? I mean, so there's a little bit sticking out at the top. We're aware of all that. Every the big part was all underneath. Uh we don't we can't really get access to that except by these ideas that he had, you know, slips of the tongue and dreams and that sort of thing. Uh but the the second text that I translated in this new book, How to Have Willpower, is a fascinating uh yet another view of exactly the same things. Predentius is the poet. He's a Christian but with a classical education and it's all about the battle of the soul and it's competing desires and he's trying to figure out what what could that even look like on the inside of us, right? Uh and he would talk in terms of soul. He does talk in terms of soul and he's a Christian so he believes the soul is immortal and so forth but uh he he's he calls it going into the cave of the breast and so kind of like Freud he has this idea that there's like there's some like inaccessible part of our the seat of our emotions and he loates it in the breast as the ancients tended to do today we'd put it in the brain but all these things strike me as as similar right uh we're obviously digestion and pl this goes back to Plato right I'm sure you know Uh we're not we we can't control digestion, right? We can't control heartbeat. I mean, you can spike your heartbeat, but that's not what we're talking about, right? Uh I mean, you can go run a few laps and you'll raise it, but uh but of course, thinking is part of it, but Plato divided the soul into these different things, but does that mean it's a physical division of any possible kind, or are we just describing different functions that can be done that way? I don't think we have any answers to these things. And that was just to bring it back to Sauce if you don't mind me doing that. The beauty of Sass's arguments is he says we got to be humble about this stuff. We don't have any idea how this stuff works. It doesn't But I'm not saying that uh things are great and there aren't problems in this world and of course all that stuff is real. People have severe problems. People have all kinds of suffering. But if we don't know how it works, the idea that taking drugs and things is going to fix it. there's no evidence is against that or labbotomizing people or electroshocking them. Uh which is what they used to do. He wrote against some of that stuff when it was happening. Um or SSRIs, you know, people write about that now. It's a hairy topic, but there was a big, if you don't mind me quoting some more contemporary stuff. There's a do a psychiatrist in London, Dr. Joanna Monreef, she published a big study a couple years ago. She said the evidence is not there that depression is a chemical imbalance. The evidence suggests it's not. Uh, and so if it's not, well, maybe the interventions would be different from the ones we're offering. And who did she catch heat because these are heresies. If you utter these, it's like walking into the Vatican and saying, you know what, I don't believe in the Trinity. Oh, they're going to throw you out the door. Uh, so these are but these are tough things. And I don't mean to make light of them o other than to try and show the similarities and the patterns of thought. Uh, the mythmaking to get back to what we're talking about at the beginning, how people react to these things. Yeah. One question I had for you that uh I'm curious because you knew him is what Saw's impressions of Stoicism might have been. I I think in some ways he may have seen life as more tragic than the Stoics. Stoics have this picture of providence. Perhaps they also have these ideas about how you can shape yourself into if not the sage, someone who approximates the sage. >> Well, he definitely >> along that path. >> Pardon me. I'm sorry. Yeah, he uh so I know a little bit about this. Uh he and I never talked about the uh the Stoics, but there is actually a letter there was a letter surfaced on eBay five or six years ago and it was about S sauce and the Stoics. I downloaded a picture and somebody had written to him and uh and I can't remember what the question was, but we have his response in the letter and he recommends he says, "You may find the Stoics who are very interested in dealing with woe. They have some good ideas." And he recommends the Penguin edition of Senica's letters. Uh, I'll see if if I can dig out a copy, I'll send it to you. It's only maybe two or three sentences and that's all he says. And I sent it to some of my friends who knew SAS very well and they said, "No, I don't remember him ever talking about these things." But he uh he was a big big big big believer in talk therapy, which is sort of what the Stoics are all about, right? uh that this idea that we can help people with their problems uh and if we can talk it out the he didn't like to say the patient but the person who comes in seeking help could learn something about their life about their situation about their desires about their aversions uh you know if if I say this is what you need to do to fix your life and you say yeah I don't want to do that say that's fine fine with me it's your life but but at least now you know right this is on you right? If you want to have six-pack abs and you don't feel like exercising, you want to eat anything you want, that's probably not going to happen for you. Uh those are the but just be okay with that. I don't care. It's what you want. So, in that regard, I think you leaned a little more toward the Epicurans. You know, let people make their choices even when uh they don't really look prudent to many other people. >> Yeah, that's probably >> it's a tough tough thing. the little he would probably he'd probably smack me for saying this because I know he resisted this but you know he grew up in Hungary in Budapest in the 20s uh to a secular Jewish family. They were chased away by the Nazis. Uh and so he arrived in America as fanatically anti-Nazi, fanatically anti-communist. And so you can understand why somebody who uh dodged a double bullet in that way uh would have some of these views. of course always said no I came my views completely independently of those >> I respect you per say that but I see circumstances might have shaped them too uh so that's that gives a little background there I don't those aren't really things you get into in the ancient world we don't really have you know totalitarian societies like that in the ancient world >> yeah I suppose that's an interesting question I suppose you have the picture of the tyrant but not these sort of larger bureaucratic or systems with totalizing ideologies. Perhaps that's not something you you really see. >> Yeah. I mean, uh, Rome in the time of Senica did become sort of a surveillance state. It got worse as time went on, but you could leave. Uh, you could always just get out if you I mean, you could go to the Persian Empire. Nobody did, but you could go to other comm. It was not like the USSR where they shoot you if you try and leave. Uh, and there were no like mass deportations or anything like that in the ancient world. Um, anyhow. >> All right. Well, is there anything else you'd like to add coming out of time? >> Uh, you know, I can't think of I'm I'm really delighted to be able to talk about the the thought of Thomas House and the connection with with your project here, right? Uh, you have a community of people that are trying to self-empower in the best way they can, live the happiest lives they can. We want to promote flourishing. I these are all fantastic aims and it takes a lot of courage to read sauce but if people are willing to at least read and think about it maybe even talk about it. Uh there some of the truth bombs can be extraordinarily difficult to take but uh but you might find a lot a lot of wisdom there. He was also a very funny writer. Very funny. Uh he got better as time went on so there's some entertaining stuff but there really is a synthesis to be had there between those two thinker uh between all these thinkers. >> Yeah absolutely. Yeah. Thanks so much for coming on. I know you've read a number of other things we haven't touched on, so I hope we can do it again. >> Yeah, that sounds great. Anytime. >> Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com and please get in touch with us at Stoa at stoameditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
