---
title: "Anger And Society (Episode 202)"
slug: anger-and-society
episode_number: 202
youtube_id: bkPEHfmEVvw
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bkPEHfmEVvw
upload_date: 2025-09-23
duration: 11:42
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stowa Conversations. My name is Caleb Anttoveros and today will be a short solo episode. Michael and I had a longer conversation interview with the excellent Donald Robertson on stoicism and anger. So, I just wanted to reflect on that briefly and make sure we sent out something for our Tuesday episode. We released the Donald episode last week on Thursday evening and it's been wellreceived. There's no question about that. A popular episode. Donald goes over the stoic account of anger, how that maps onto modern accounts of the view, what people can do to become less angry, some of the strategies from the Stoics, and also shared some of his thoughts on the on the specific ways Americans express anger in particular and perhaps how that that way of expressing anger dominates the internet regardless of where you live. Certainly was an interesting conversation. Do check that out. It's on our Substacker.com as well as our podcast feed. We also have an earlier episode. That's episode on why anger is always bad. In that episode, Michael and I went through Senica's on anger and and attempted to capture the essence of the Stoic view on anger and went through several of Senica's arguments for why it's always bad and responses to people who claim otherwise. And I think something I was thinking about after the conversation with Donald Robertson's an idea that uh might occur to people who are familiar with this stoic view, sympathetic to it, wish they are were less angry, perhaps even are less angry than a typical person. I think it's this this initial I think it's this idea common idea that emerges out of anger really being a social emotion. It's perhaps not as inward as other negative passions tend to be. Whether that's depression or anxiety, think of rumination, something that goes on in one's head. Anger, I think, is a much more a more external matter, a social matter. And we have this idea that if you don't get angry at my behalf, that means you don't care about me. And that statement may sound juvenile to a stoic. But I do think there's a sense in which it's rational. So consider a political case. Perhaps political cases are going to be less important for most people than the real interpersonal conflicts, events that arise in one's life. But I think this is a useful illustration. If you just if you take the recent political case of the murder of Charlie Kirk and and you're angry about it, that just means you're more likely to be right-wing. You're more likely to Well, it doesn't just mean that, but among other things, that means you're likely to be right-wing. You're more likely to want to do something about this kind of event, have some response, or another to prevent this kind of thing from happening in the future, and address what happened in a way that accounts for justice on the right-wing view. If you're not angry, that means you're more likely to be on the left. And this is just common sense reasoning. You know, the pool of people who are angry includes mostly people who are right-wing. The set of people who are not, you know, while these people tend to be a little bit more on the left. So, if you're angry, you definitely disapprove of the murder. If you're not angry, you're in a pool of people who do disagree with it, are indifferent to it, or perhaps even welcome the event. So in this way, people use anger as a cue to see who agrees with them in political in political matters. And you can see how this has a kind of ratcheting effect as people who are more angry are certainly people who you can be confident agree with you more. And as such there's there's a real kind of social incentive almost to be angry, to show that anger, to express that your political convictions are genuine, that they're the real deal. You're not merely saying something. you, you know, Senica talks about how angry people are ugly. You know, you're really defor deforming your appearance for the sake of your political convictions. You have that redness of the face scrunching up of the nose, what have you, the mouth, a gape perhaps. And uh all that means is that anger can serve as a useful social signal. And I think that puts people who disapprove of of say in in this specific case that puts people who disapprove of the killing but don't express themselves with anger in an interesting place. And of course there is the difference between expressing anger and being angry oneself. Perhaps it's strategic before a political player to express anger without themselves being corrupted by the passion. It's almost like the Epictitus line about not groaning inwardly. But often of course these things come together. We're typically not separating things in that manner. And of course, there is an argument that you shouldn't do such a thing. That to act in that way is not authentic. Sounds like a rationalization of sorts. You know, I'm not angry. I'm just acting angry. Uh so that's in the political case, but we see it in the interpersonal realm as well. If a loved one is seriously hurt by another, failing to be enraged would be seen by some to be inappropriate. It would be cold as if you didn't care. Goes back to that original idea we opened with. You know, if don't get if you don't get angry at my behalf when I'm hurt by others, that means you don't care about me. And you can see the reasoning here this sort of almost almost bashian reasoning you know if you if you are angry that's just ev that is evidence that you care about me because people who are not angry well that just includes more behaviors that involve not caring about me is the abstract way to put it and you could wish the world were otherwise but given our current culture that's the way things stand. You know, of course, perhaps it would be better. Perhaps it would be better if people didn't read so much into passions, the way we expressed ourselves. But simply saying we wish for nuance isn't enough. No, people aren't dumb. The fact of the matter is that many people when asking for nuance don't care whether it counts to politics and to personal matters. And uh we need to make a lot of decisions in the day. We're often lazy and going to default to heruristics judging people by the way uh they judging people by the way they express themselves. Of course one can make terrible mistakes by using these sorts of rough huristics this kind of reasoning of you really cared you would behave in this way and so on. But I think what it is a sort of interesting question and that of as I said that that kind of reasoning can certainly be distorted and it's almost an empirical matter you know has someone seen enough people to know what caring looks like and I think and of course when you encounter more and more people what that means you have get a larger sense of how others express their emotions their desires and these sort of caricatured views will fall away, but they don't completely fall away. So, I think I think that's sort of the if if you will, I don't I think that's in this in these discussions of anger. I think that's something that could be overlooked in the political case, of course, but perhaps it's much more important in the interpersonal one in our day-to-day relationships. And the takeaway for people who are drawn to the stoic view of anger is a simple one but but essential. You when a loved one is hurt, you have to show that you care for them. In the domain of politics, you need to show that any call for nuance is genuine. If the stoic response is to encourage slowing things down, if the stoic is dispassionate, they need to prove what they care through their actions. And the burden is some on some in some sense on them. And perhaps it's going to be a you know this there's a social burden sort of like an evidential burden to show that whatever it is care friendship values are legitimate and to prove that to others is going to require action showing character over time and I think that's just that's just another way in which perhaps the standard for Stoics is a high one and policing attempting attempting to manage our own perhaps even others emotional responses is really a small sliver of what the Stoic is called to do. So that's what I've been thinking about and uh that's what was triggered by uh the recent conversation with Donald reach out to us. Let us know what you thought. Curious about your takes on all this and um subscribe to us on the STOA letter if you haven't already. We'll be doing some more of these Substack live events and we'd uh love to see you there. Thanks for listening. Bye.
