---
title: "Ask Us Anything (Episode 207)"
slug: ask-us-anything
episode_number: 207
youtube_id: pPvrzIfapF4
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pPvrzIfapF4
upload_date: 2025-10-28
duration: 46:05
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

All right, we're live. We're on Substack Live. This will be an episode of Stoic Conversations between Michael and I where we are taking questions from readers or really anyone in the chat as well. If you have any questions about stoicism, philosophy broadly, happy to take them. And we had a number of questions emailed in, some commented, and also I suppose over the past month or so had some common threads of different kinds of questions people have asked us. So if we don't get too many questions in the live chat, we'll just be running through those. The uh first question we have is around sort of the nature of the unconscious and stoicism. So do you want to kick us off with that, Michael? >> Yeah. So this question um was um you know from a from a reader listener about what is the role of unconscious decisions in stoicism or do those exist what do those look like? Um, it's a good question because I think starting with Plato, you have this framework of this animal part of your mind or this maybe irrational part of your mind that um it motivates you and pushes you in directions and it's the the job of the the rational part of your mind to control that part. And when and then I think in Floyd and modern psychology you get this idea at least in pop psychology you get this idea of the subconscious that plays this really important role. Um you have these parts of yourself that you might not be aware of these desires these interests. Um stoicism doesn't really have this kind of picture of of um the irrational subconscious. I guess it really depends on what we what we mean by subconscious or unconscious decisions. Um, you can do things according to the Stoics, you can obviously do things without being consciously aware of them. You can obviously make decisions, form judgments without being consciously aware of them. That happens all the time. And that's one of the things that Stoicism is intentionally trying to stop. When we talk about mindfulness or um pro, it's about being conscious of the decisions you're making because the Stoics also view our beliefs as decisions. In a way we have experiences we we you know the example I like to use somebody bumps into you and you get angry the stoics are going to say that was a decision because you judge that person as insulting you as harming you in some way and you're you're fighting uh you're now angry at them for harming you want to get revenge something along these lines so yeah I guess that's the distinction I want to make is we have lots of unconscious decisions and stoicism if we mean they are not things we are aware decisions we are aware of making and that's where a lot of our emotions will come from. That's where a lot of our passions will come from and stoic mindfulness is about making those judgments conscious, intentional, purposeful. That's a big part of the of the work. But what they don't have is they don't have this picture of the subconscious. They don't have this picture of um there's some sort of irrational part of oursel that pushes us to do things and then we have to use our reason or our intellect to fight against that. there's there there's not really that conflict. Um that's one of my favorite parts of stoicism is that everything is reducible in stoic behavior. I mean you know this Caleb that everything is reducible to that idea of um what do you believe? What are your what are your judgments? What are your values? And so, um, when we when we act in ways that maybe seem subconscious to us or seem like they're being motivated by the subconscious or animal part of ourselves, the stoic is going to say, "No, that's actually a value that you hold or that's actually a belief that you have. And how is the way that you're feeling or the way that you're acting? How is that um giving you information?" Or, "What is that telling you about the beliefs you you do hold? What is that telling you about what you do value?" Um, and so that's the way that I I would think about it. no to maybe you want to call that subconscious but yes to unconscious decisions. Um and a big part of stoin is bringing those to the forefront. >> Yeah, absolutely. Well, first I should say thanks for joining all our uh handful of viewers. Feel free to drop a question in the chat and we'll take it on. Um just continuing on this theme of the unconscious I suppose. So what you're saying the idea is that we have decisions that we make that we're not aware of. You know you have this idea of reflection you get an impression and the ideal philosopher stoic reflects on their experience and then makes a decision about it. But there are so many cases in our lives where we sort of sleepwalk through life and it's in that sense where we don't reflect on our decisions our judgments the way we're thinking. In that sense, the Stoics agree, you know, they that we are unconscious and so in some real sense and uh we're working to become more conscious, more reflective uh and aware. But what they don't have is this idea that oh, there's something that bubbles up in our, you know, the depths of our psyche that forces us to make some decision or to make some judgment. I think that's I think that's a a a critical part of their picture of the world as you say like you know even if it feels like there's something uh even if you feel coerced in a value judgment or emotion those stoics say you're playing a role in that part of you is making a decision about it even if you're uh not actively aware of it in the moment or uh even if you rather not believe that. Yeah, >> I think it's exactly right. I think sleepwalking is a nice is a nice metaphor because you're like participating. You're participating. It's not this this other part of you. It's not this jackal and hide um you just might not be fully fully conscious, fully aware um of of your own thoughts or of your own values, of your own beliefs. >> Great. Cool. Well, nice. Let's take another one. We have another question um perhaps somewhat related to this. It's really on what's possible with stoicism and it's can I train my mind to a level of automaticity where I nearly always select the appropriate action. Um almost in a way it's that's automatic and that generates uh you know that right impulse from the impression. >> Yeah, I think this is a really good one. Um there's this framework. I don't actually know whose framework it is. I should I should look it up, but framework my athletic coach used to talk a lot about in Brazilian jiu-jitsu where you start with unconscious incompetence. Um you you you are bad at the sport and you don't even realize you're bad. Then you can become um consciously incompetent. You know your mistakes. Then you become consciously competent. You know how to hit the baseball and you're doing it intentionally. And then at the highest level, there's that kind of unconscious competence where somebody pitches the ball and you just swing and you hit it and it's you're not even thinking about it. And so the Stoics are going to talk about ethics or morality like any other craft. They're going to say it's like sport. It's like playing an instrument. It's like um any other skill that you develop. And so I think it follows that that similar model where you begin, this was the sleepwalking. You begin with unconscious incompetence. Yeah, you're getting angry and you don't even know why. Um, you're feeling anxious and you're not even aware of why. Maybe you learn some stoicism and you go, "I'm getting anxious because I'm trying to control things that aren't up to me." Um, and then eventually you you're making the right judgments. You're making you're acting in a stoic way, but you're doing it intentionally. It's taking effort. And then eventually you become unconsciously confident. And so um yes, the Stoics said that the sage or the perfect person or the you know the the moral morally excellent person would almost be automatically competent. So they they they they actually said that you couldn't become once you became virtuous, you actually couldn't lose that virtue because you the the sage isn't even really like deliberating in the same way we we do. They understand themselves. They understand themselves in relation to the universe. They understand what virtue is. They understand what it means to be a good person. And so when, you know, life pitches, to use that metaphor, life pitches an impression at them like pitching a ball at them. They just swing and they hit it. Um, and they it's it's almost a reflective or automatic reaction, at least in most situations. And you can think of this as a person, I used that example in the start, somebody bumps into you and you get angry. You know, the the consciously competent stoic is the person that gets bumped into and goes, "Okay, was that did that was that a bad thing? Was I harmed? Was that something in my control?" They kind of run through the list and they evaluate the impression. And you can imagine the stoic sage is the person who gets bumped into and doesn't even they don't even have to deliberate. Um they just they just understand that's that um being bumped into in a crowd isn't any kind of harm to them and they don't need to think about it more deeply. So I do think that kind of that that automatic selection of of you know the appropriate way to act or the appropriate way to feel. Yeah. It was it was a big part of stois. Now can you achieve that? This this they famously said the sages are really uncommon as uncommon as a phoenix once every 500 years. It's not an easy standard, but I really do like Caleb that athletic metaphor of you think, yeah, at the end of the day, we're trying to be the kind of people who um respond to situations in a skillful way like a like a musician playing a chord out of habit, like an like an athlete responding to a pitch. And so that is the target to aim aim for. >> Yeah, absolutely. It's a aspiration. And I suppose if you take the question >> at face value, can I become someone who always responds automatically with the right decision? The answer is probably not just given the nostic view about how rare the sage was. Because that's really what the question is asking is, you know, can I become a sage? And uh yeah, it's simply a exceptionally difficult project. Perhaps some stoics even doubted that it was possible. But that being said, and this is also why I like the athletic metaphor. It's true that you can become more like a sage and make better decisions, take the appropriate action, a wider range of circumstances uh throughout one's life. I think the studies certainly believe in the idea of progress even if you can reach the ideal ideal standard. Um and I think something that grounds that in stoism in the philosophy is that if you you can see other people making excellent decisions taking the appropriate action uh you know exemplars are real and there's fundamentally nothing that separates you from them. Like of course you have different talents, different personality, different environment and such, but the stoics were keen to emphasize that we are all, you know, we're all able to make decisions. You know, we're rational animals and because of that fact, uh, we can choose appropriate actions. You know, there's nothing holding you back as it were. So I think that's um I suppose that's the optimistic side of the message in addition to you know that that aspiration to become a sage where there is something admirable to shoot for that target even if it's an exceptionally difficult one to reach. >> Yeah. Stoism is like a sport. It's it's not like basketball or something where there's like you know some people are just going to be 6'8 and they're just it's going to um be easy for them and some people are going to be shorter. um we're all kind of equipped um yeah we're equipped with an ability there there's not that there's not a core fundamental difference between myself and Marcus Aurelius or Senica or Epictitus um in terms of the relevant quality and the relevant quality is as you said we're you know rational beings we're people um who are able to reflect upon what we're thinking and feeling and and think carefully and make better decisions. >> Yep. Absolutely. Although of course you can't win every game in life in a way that stoic says you know everyone can win the game of life as it were even if they're not suited for you know basketball politics >> what have you you are suited for other uh roles and you can be excellent in them make and that just means making a the right decision in them. >> Mhm. Totally. >> Yeah. I think that's that's an excellent part of stoicism. One of my favorite aspects I suppose. You want to take another question? >> Yeah. So, we got some questions. Um, one here I've I've kind of anonymized it a bit, but the the question is, and you can you can fill in this with what you want, but I've observed some sort of, you know, there's some sort of incredible injustice in the world, and you can fill that in with what you want. Something, you know, something terrible's happened. Somebody's suffering that seems unnecessary. It seems um terrible. um how am I supposed to stay calm about this? How am I supposed to um not be upset about what seems, you know, to to to add to the question probably about some sort of instance of vice or suffering out in the world? Um what is a stoic what is a stoic strategy for handling that? >> Yeah, it's certainly a difficult question. And something that's funny about this question, I know we anonymize it a bit, is that we've had different varieties of these questions. Usually has to do with politics and we get them both from the left and the right. So in particular, we emails asking how to respond to the assassination of Charlie Kirk, perhaps people who are a little more right leaning. Uh and we've also had email about how to respond to, you know, the recent uh corruption from Trump or something of this of this nature. So on one hand it's a difficult question on its face just as it stands but of course on the other I think probably one does need to dive into the particulars of these specific situations but taking it taking it broadly um and hedging I think we could spend a whole really an exceptional amount of time on on this question how to manage anger how to manage uh especially political uh matters as matter of justice this I think something that's useful is a common way these questions are framed is you know how do I stay calm about this and I think the first distinction a stoic might make is they do call on philosophers not to be full of passion you know not to act out of what we might say of extreme emotion not to be irrational um but at the same time they're also that's consistent with being assertive taking a And so you know it's not just of course that the stoics are asking for a calm uh tranquility that is not involved in politics. Many stoics were exceptionally involved in politics from uh resisting emperors to becoming emperors of course. So with that said I think Marcus Aurelius his notes on how to address anger and meditations I believe it's 118 are exceptionally useful. Of course there's Senica his work on anchor where he has a number of different strategies for attacking anger. I think personally I find the Marcus Aurelius's sort of stance on taking a wider perspective you know thinking about the span of time the uh political regimes that have come and gone the reality of uh the mortal nature of everything to be useful. uh you know Senica has this funny line about you know that man who you're so angry with how can you wish anything worse upon him than death and that's going to happen regardless of of what you do so I think there's something to us to that style of thought um and perhaps it's also you know taking that broader perspective is also useful when you think about you know what's the correct judgment of these events to begin with you know how do you in fact deal with assassination free speech corruption and such I think sometimes when people think about these issues, it can it can help both from sort of emotional standpoint being rational of course, but also looking at uh other instances in history can I think inform one's judgment as it were of how what justice actually looks like in these cases. >> Yeah, I think I mean that's that that makes sense to me because I generally think the issue it's almost like splitting into two different issues. On one hand, you you have trivial things that we're that you're blowing out of proportion. And so it's like I'm getting really anxious in traffic. Uh I really care about what people are saying about me. And then there's this separate question of, you know, things that are just non-trivial, these these these uh very substantial um moments. Um, and I think I think you hit the I think you hit the nail on the head is like one of the the only way to deal for me with the those bigger moments is to expand that expand your conception of the world. I think if you try to go purely to the dichotomy of control, it can almost be unsatisfying in that moment of well, you know, this isn't up to me or I don't control it. And that to me I think is is is bit more of a useful tool to smaller personal injustices or smaller moments of conflict for those for those larger moments of like the way the world is right now or feels like the world is on fire. It feels like there's this there is a crisis in some cases there might be global warming is another example people have asked us about before. Um, yeah, just I think just summarizing what you're saying, expanding that control, expanding that conception of time is is is helpful. Understanding that things like this have have happened before will happen again. And that part of your role as a human is to understand how to maneuver them and understand, as you said, how to participate in them in a healthy way. Um, and so to be politically active or to to stand up for the things that that you believe in, but in a healthy way and in a sustainable way. Um, and so I I I I use a lot of Marxist tools of the the view from above. Um, or expanding my conception of time over a larger period of time. Um, I I think back about things that have happened in the past and how, you know, the way that they've unfolded has sometimes been unclear. Um, and then we're not, you know, people might have thought that that was it was going to go one way and it went another and there's there's that kind of ambiguity that you can only look at in hindsight. Um, I I find that kind of idea reassuring as well. I think that's basically just adding on to what you're saying that I think I think you have to expand perception in that moment because if if you if you get too focused on um the particular situation it can be it's it's ineffective and can and can can um yeah lead to the kind of anxiety we're talking about. >> Yeah, I think so. I think there's also the idea of surprise that I find useful. You know, one way to frame uh the stoic project is to reduce the number of times you are surprised by, you know, really internalizing true beliefs essentially pursuing knowledge. So, of course, there's a famous line from Marcus Aurelius, you know, not be surprised when a fruit tree produces fakes and likewise, you shouldn't be surprised when uh men are vicious. I think that's just a reality of life. Of course, in a certain sense, if you're angry about corruption, you know, didn't you already believe that people were corrupt, the political systems were corrupt? You know, what exactly surprises you about this state of affairs? I think that question can be useful because sometimes of course you are learning something about the world. You know, you made an assumption uh about uh something that turns out to be false about specific people that turn out to be false. Uh but in other times it I think common outrages really are uh things that you know you should expect whether you're on the right uh or the left you know it's part of your worldview and and then then there's that question you know okay what role then is anger especially when it becomes a property of crowds as opposed to the individual you know what what role is that actually playing. Yeah, great points. Great points. Not a uh not a beginner, you know, if you could study stoicism for a little bit and it could remove your anxiety about um you know, major major world events, then that would be not not would be lovely. It's not it's not a beginner technique, I would say. Uh but agree with your point about if you already think this, if you already know this, you know, if if you already think that there are flawed people in the world, if you already think there are flawed people in positions of power or or people that do terrible things, um why is there that degree of surprise? And shouldn't that already be kind of incorporated or shouldn't that be built in to to the model, so to speak? Um so that there's not that that surprise or that shock um when it when it happens. >> Yeah. But I find I find just adding on that I find personally that I become more angry often for smaller outrages as opposed to >> uh events are truly significant scale and I think it's because I assume that of course there are structural problems in the world but at least you know these few freedoms should be treated as sacred and never >> uh violated even if they're >> relatively small in the scheme of things or at least you know, these sorts of uh bureaucracies should be combatant in this way. Uh and then whether or not that that's uh almost harder to deal with than you know, the brute realities of war uh or uh you know, existential risks, catastrophic risks, what have you. >> Yes. So, it's the same kind of >> just to be clear. >> You think yeah, that's that's a mistake on your end, but I mean it's the same kind of mistake, right? is it's it's like um it's the same exercise before is what are those beliefs that are subconscious and when when you're experiencing that shock or emotion, you know, what belief is being challenged? Um and for you maybe it's a bit more you're a bit more either realist or cynical about the the large scale things and then um bit more unrealistically I don't know maybe optimistic or ignorant about the small things and then it's it's it's surprising to you again. >> Yeah. Um, anything else on that one? Do you want to say? >> No, there's this related one. You want to take take that one next? >> Um, you I mean this this is another difficult one. I I personally find this ones quite hard. Is that how can stoicism help deal with political anger and the divisions between people? >> What do you think? >> Yeah. So, we've said a little bit about political anger. I suppose if you think about divisions between people that's something we could speak to a little more. Um again I think Marcus Aurelius is useful here. There's meditations 2.1 which is really the framework for how he approached anger. you know, expecting other people to be vicious at the same time reminding himself that, you know, what it is to live a good life, to be a good emperor is to work with other people, live well with them, and remember that at the end of the day, you're fundamentally uh all human. And that mean that means treating them with justice and respect. And I think that idea especially of respect. I had a conversation with Alexandra Hudson not so long ago who's you know promoting this idea of civility and political engagements. Um and she sort of sees civility perhaps my framing not hers would see civility as the middle way between politeness that completely avoids unnecessary conflict versus you know conflict prone politics where you're in it to win on your side perhaps no matter the cost. Whereas civility is, you know, the ability to see other people with respect, but at the same time have difficult conversations, take a stand, be assertive, fight for uh justice. Um, and I think that's a I think that's a that's a useful idea, useful target for dealing with other people is what does civility look like? you know, how can you find, as it were, the balance between assertiveness, uh, willingness to fight over what's worth fighting for without being drawn into useless, uh, conflict. Well, I think part of civility comes back to that line from Marcus Relius you were referencing 2.1 which is this idea of and paraphrasing but it's something along the lines of you know remember that we're connect that you're connected with this person that you're both that you're both humans that you're meant to be cooperating and so I think part of the I think you have to find or the stoic argument is you you have to find some sort of common ground with this person some sort of shared goal or shared Good. And for the Stoics, that's easy because they were um cosmopolitans, right? Our fundamental ideas as people trying to live, trying to navigate the confusing experience of being alive. And so we share that. It's not left against right. It's not my country against your country. It's like the most important overriding identity is that of people. And so when you confront somebody as another person, then that that's a grounds by which to have the civility that you talked about. The other thing that helps me in these kinds of conversations is that stoic idea of um you people people um you you're you're both just trying to pursue the good as you view it, right? You're everybody is just everybody is just trying to live out the best life as they as they understand it. And now it's that's not a relativistic claim. Stoics are going to say some people are wrong. You know, some people think some people think things that aren't true and something some people think that things are okay that aren't are okay or not okay and some people think that things are wrong that should be allowed and should be should be fine. Um so there's still a grounds to have a debate, but when when I'm confronting another human, you know, maybe if they're if they're coming antagonistically, maybe it's just like I don't want to have this conversation. it's not a productive conversation. But if they're willing to have that conversation civily, then you should also be willing to have that conversation civily because you're just two people who are saying once you get past the the disagreement um or the emotional shock of the disagreement, you're just somebody expressing your worldview um and you're you're I think both both people on the left or the right are pursuing, you know, their conception of the good life or their conception of what they think is good for society. And so having the argument on that grounds I have found has been much more constructive and that was something I learned through philosophy. I learned through taking logic courses and through studying stoicism. Um Epictitus's idea has this idea of preconceptions that you know everybody wants what is good but they just call good different things. Everybody wants what's just they just call just different things. And so when you talk to a person you go okay you think this is unjust. We both agree we don't want unjust things to happen. But why do you think it's unjust? What is that? you know, what are your values that make this unjust? And I think you can you can have that conversation uh go back to that term of civility pretty civily and that's a way to understand um and engage with other people that I found effective. That's something I try to always do is just like I'm going to first try to understand you as well as possible and do that because you're just um you know, you're just trying to pursue your conception of the good life. We might disagree and you might be wrong. I might be wrong, but at least we can we can have a conversation on on that grounds. >> Yeah, that's a great point. I think uh sometimes in these kinds of conversations, people will say things like, you know, we're so different, we can't live together. You know, we can't live with these people, the right or the left, whoever it is. And um I think it's worth putting a question mark whether that's really true in many cases, of course. uh and in reality you do impact with live with this these people or perhaps you've chosen a state where you don't get to encounter them but uh I think that's uh often in most cases certainly something should one should be skeptical about and even if it is the case that you imagine the case of full-blown conflict that is warranted sometimes the stoic position I think the position of many other philosophies is that you still don't let you still don't lose is your head in those positions. You sort of see the pos the situation almost as tragic, right? You know, different visions of the good and that necessitates uh conflict in order to >> uh you realize justice whatever that may be. It's not a kind of revalry or uh politics that feels good in a way perhaps. I think there's a kind of politics where it becomes either a sanctimonious righteousness uh that that you might see or on one perhaps you see that a little bit more commonly on the left or whereas perhaps on the right these days there's almost a kind of uh cruelty anger victory or something of this sort but both of those feel good in a way that perhaps one should be suspicious of I think there's conflict is warranted I don't I don't want to have the view that you can have a dialogue with anyone find common ground or dead anyone. I think that's a that's far too optimistic and somewhat unrealistic. Um and but at the same time when you get get into these positions of conflict when you're truly advocating for a different cause, different position, there's a kind of tragedy in that it's not it's not I think one should be wary of these uh kind of political emotions uh that make the you know make it feel like you're the protagonist of a movie slaying the uh you know all the dragons and such. Yeah, the slang about you don't want to feel like you're dunking on people or something, you know. I don't want to feel like uh oh, this is um any sort of joy like that. I I I think about this, you know, if I go back to this question one more time from a kind of stoic point of view, you know, there there's just that common sense to stoicism. People have always disagreed. People have always based on their upbringing or their background had different political alignments, held different positions. Um, and you know, do you want to go through life feeling alienated from other people, being like, I can only engage with people who uh align, or do we want to is there a way to have these conversations civily? Um, and it seems like yes, if you if you are willing to say your position and engage with their position, there's not basically there's not this big surprise that there's disagreement. That's not some sort of like new new situation. Um, and I think that's important to keep in mind as well. It's part of the part of the human experience and you should figure out a way to handle those those conversations as well as possible. Um, anything else to add on that one before we we jump to one more? >> No, I think that's it. Uh, feel free to leave a question on that thread or any other questions if you're watching. But, uh, let's take on some of the others. >> So, one question, we'll get a little more technical. So, we go from politics to stoic psychology. Um, one question was, uh, if I had to, the the short version of it is, um, well, maybe I'll just read it out here. The question is, I'm confused about the prohibist. And the prohis, uh, that's Epictitus' idea of the part of ourselves that makes decisions that reflects upon impressions. Um, this person says, "It seems like this like it's stoic doctrine after Epictitus that our prohis faculty of choice is the only thing in our power." That's that's seems to be the stoic position. But in discourses 1.28, Epictita seems to say that we cannot control what we ascent to because we can only ascend to what we believe is true. So do we have power over our proyus or not? I think it's a great question. Um and it's a common point of confusion. So um and so the basic question is Epictitus says our faculty of choice is up to us. Epictitus also says that we have to ascend to what seems true to us. If I look outside and there's sunlight, I have to believe it's day. So, how do I how do I reconcile those two things? Um, and the typical answer to that is is it comes down to I think to a misunderstanding of control. So, when Epictitus says that uh our faculty of choice is we control it, the translation I prefer is that the faculty of choice is up to us which means that it's not determined by other things. My body is determined by other things because somebody can Zita says you can chain my leg, you can throw me in jail. But not even Zeus, not even God can determine control what I choose. So that that is up to me. But what it means for something to be up to you does not mean it like exists distinct from your current beliefs, from your emotions, from your history. So I it's up to you in terms of you're making these choices. You're responsible for these choices, but it's not up to you in in terms of I can choose in a vacuum. I could I could look outside and I could believe it's it's nighttime even though it's light outside. Um or I could choose to um you know snap my fingers and believe I'm 8 foot tall or something like this. We we don't have these we don't have these kinds of powers um any more than I can read sto and this is this also this is also this idea I can't read stoicism once and decide oh okay I've now chosen that virtue is the only good and I'm a sage now um the the way we choose things is we make decisions based on evidence and based on um our reflection on the evidence and we weigh up the evidence against our current set of beliefs Um I hope Kale did I explain that uh well but it's it's the idea of uh when says that our faculty of choice is up to us which is true and then so then how can something up to us not be free but it it is because it's constrained by itself. It it is you can only choose based on what you know and based on what you believe. You can't just uh because you'd be anything because if you were anything you'd be nothing, right? It doesn't when you think through it logically, we have to make choices based on what we think and we believe um already. And that's why it's so important in stois and do this work to make small changes to what we believe because if I if I make a small change to what I believe, it has all these positive side effects down the road. If I if I change the way I think about my political enemies, for example, if I change the way I think about the value of money or appearance or fame or something like this, if I if I genuinely change that belief, it's going to make all these kinds of moments of behavior or character a lot easier because it's going to be a lot easier to to act in in the right way. Um, so that's that's that's why uh it's important to change our beliefs because it determines how we choose and how we act. Um, so yeah, that's that's how I would answer that. What what do you think, El? >> Yeah, I think that's that's well put. It's somewhat connected to the earlier question we had about making the right decisions automatically and perhaps somewhat paradoxically, it's almost as if you as you become better, you can't make the same mistakes you could have years ago. Sometimes people will talk about, you know, exceptional athletes or exceptional artists and they'll say things like, "Oh, he can't actually make the wrong move here. He's just so ingrained. You know, out of hours and hours of drilling, he's going to do the right thing uh every time." Or, you know, this artist is going to make this uh excellent decision, this aesthetic decision every time. She can't make something ugly even if she tried. And in a way, that's uh that's what you're shooting for some paradoxically. It's in the moment where you're attempting progress where now you need to make a decision between the right uh you know right actions and wrong ones and then it's uh up to you about how you make that uh up to you how you make that decision. Uh you've got more freedom there perhaps in a sense but it's not the freedom stoics ultimately care about uh which is a related point here. It's not uh freely pursuing the good um in a way that emerges from you. It's the ability to you know enslave yourself to externals or act ignously or what have you. Um so I I hope that gets at the thrust of a of that question but I think I think that's a some related points that I think the Stoics make. Yeah, I think so. Like because maybe maybe one other way to take it is that idea of freedom, right? When the when the Stoics talk about what does it mean to be free then if I'm determined by my beliefs or I can't choose other than what I already think or something along these lines. I think there's two things. One is you can create a type of freedom for yourself by deliberating and being conscious. This was the this goes back to that previous conversation as you said when when I'm when I'm sleepwalking through life I really am just like an input output machine. I receive an experience and I I uh output an emotion. You know somebody says something to me and I output a reaction or a response. I even though I, you know, have beliefs 1 through 10 or my character is the way it is, I can exert some sort of control over that situation by pausing, reflecting, slowing things down. It it's basically thinking there's a little bit of movement. Going back to the athlete analogy, which is so helpful, or the painting analogy, um, you know, the painter can can paint something really quickly and poorly, or they can paint something slower. Just because they went slower doesn't mean they can become a Picasso, but they can reach maybe like the ceiling of their potential by slowing down and doing things intentionally. And the stoics are basically saying that is you've got a little range for your beliefs or range for how you act. And if you go slowly and you go intentionally, you can hit the higher part of that range. Um, and you want to do that because when life comes at you fast and hard, you're going to kind of fall to your floor. So you want you want to kind of get get your floor as high as possible and build that skill slowly intentionally over time. Again, just like a sport or or an art. That's one point about you. You do have that freedom by being slow and intentional. Another point of freedom that Epictitus talks about is it's not that I'm I'm free to be whoever I want or to believe whatever I want. Epictitus very famously uh he makes fun of the skeptics who's like, "Oh, you say you don't believe things, but if I throw this pot at your head, you're going to duck." Right? Like there's certain things we just kind of have to have to believe to be true. Um, but when Abictitus talks about freedom, it's that um I I can't be coerced by others. So if I'm the kind of person that believes that the quality of my life depends on, you know, what these people think of me, it depends on me getting this promotion at work and the prestige that comes with that title. It depends on um anything that's external to me. Then other people can control me because they can threaten me with taking away the thing I want or they can bribe bribe me by offering me the thing I want. And so my behavior is now controlled by people external to me. Whereas if I desire to be a good person uh then you nobody can threaten me or bribe me. They can't threaten me by to make me a bad person. They can't bribe me to make me a good person. That's just something I do. And so the way that I act is always generated by me. I pick how to act. Nobody forces me to act a certain way. And so that's the kind of freedom that the Stoics are interested in. Not freedom um like, oh, I can believe whatever I want, which again, I think when you think about is not probably not as important to you as you might think it is or might see. It's not that big of a freedom to give up, I guess, is what I would say. >> Right. Cool. We had another question uh related to this. Can humans skip a scent and go straight from impression to impulse? Yeah, I'm happy to this is we're talking about again about the about the psychology according to the stoics. So um the stoics say that humans have this capacity to ascent which means that when we experience things we have we don't have to make experiences beliefs. they have to go through this thing called ascent which is where I have to say okay that's actually a true thing that's happening to me um I don't know you you think of this like if you're watching a movie you're viewing all these kinds of things but you're not asenting to any of them as true or you're asenting to them as a movie and so you you're not actually thinking the these are real things happening you're saying well that's just a movie um likewise if somebody bumps into me I might receive the impression oh I've been harmed this person's assaulted me assaulted me or insulted me and Um, I don't have to ascent to that as true. And so the question here is, can you skip this? Can you skip this step? Because this is what the Stoics say. Animals do. Animals don't have a scent because they're not intelligent enough. You know, they don't they're not they're not rational animals. So they just they're that input output. Again, um, the issue with this is, so I guess to be to be technical here, what the Stokes would say is that no, you're you're you're always a sentient. Something can't become a belief unless you ascend to it as true. But it goes back to the beginning of our conversation. You can ascent incredibly carelessly. You can ascent almost without noticing. And we we do it all the time. Um when we're walking down the street or we're moving we're moving around or we're we're always asenting to things not intentionally or or carefully. So we can do this. Um, but that that is just us not doing it consciously. That's a really important point because the fact that we ascent to everything is um it's the stoic's way of blocking um people controlling us, right? There's this idea that, you know, the people can't make you believe anything. And that comes back to this point because you always have that safeguard of ascent. If that wasn't true, then somebody could make you believe something. They could they could force it on you. in the stoic ideas like no you always have this ability um you're just kind of doing it carelessly or non-reflectively so we epictitus would say we can act like animals but we're not we are not animals uh nonrational animals >> yeah there's a there's the [clears throat] additional technical detail that perhaps some experiences might force a reaction out of you but they don't thereby create a belief and shape your character so there are some cases where it's almost like the mental equivalent of you the doctor tapping you on the knee and you reflexively kick out your knee. There might be some cases where you get a jump scare or something of this sort. Uh mentally you're going to shift you and you can't not do that. But that's different from creating a belief that then is sort of internalized as your character and such. >> Yeah. The sto example is we're going to flinch at a at thunder or lightning. Um, but that is just a a physical physical response. It's not we haven't formed this belief that our life's in danger and I and I I I need to be really afraid of this of this lightning storm or something. That's that's still a choice we get to make. >> Absolutely. Cool. Well, I think we leave through all our questions. You got anything else we want to touch on? >> No, that's it. Thanks, K. That was a lot of fun. >> Cool. That was fun. >> And thanks everyone for joining. Um, we'll uh keep these going, do do some more of these as we go. So, any other questions, let us know. Um, and thanks to everyone um who sent us in questions either for this or in the past. We we really appreciate it. >> Yeah, absolutely. If you have any uh specific topics or other guests who'd like to have us on um or have us put on rather conversations, we'll happily do it or attempt to at any rate. So do let us know and uh thanks for joining all. >> Okay, >> cool. Bye Michael. >> Bye >> bye.
