---
title: "Becoming Rich Won't Make You Free (Episode 212)"
slug: becoming-rich-won-t-make-you-free
episode_number: 212
youtube_id: Yctp4W5QkvU
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yctp4W5QkvU
upload_date: 2025-12-02
duration: 12:45
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to STOA conversations. My name is Caleb Ottoveros and [music] today we have a solo episode. We'll be back with some guest conversations and conversations with Michael and myself in the upcoming episodes. Uh but now it's time for a time for a quick solo missive. It's something I've been thinking about. We just finishing up a new course on Senica's letters for the STOA app. And something I've been thinking about recently related to this has to do with letter 17 where Senica talks about the dangers of wealth. One excellent line from the piece. If you wish to have leisure for your mind, either be a poor man or resemble a poor man. And I think uh I think this is an interesting topic because the takeaway because there's a first takeaway that's obvious namely that wealth has serious risks and that the path towards financial success is full of snares. I think that's an important lesson though in a sense an obvious one something that stoicism shares with the major life philosophies of the world major religions of the world are these warnings about wealth but there's some uh deeper lessons here and it's always a I think a useful concrete case to get into some of the upshots and practices of stoicism and there's also the point that you know the first pass some of this is somewhat rich coming from Senica. He was one of the wealthiest men in the Roman Empire at the time. He uh became rich serving under Nero, the Roman Emperor Nero. Uh so of course he was classically called a hypocrite. People saw his promotion of stoicism of philosophy as at its best or kind of rationalization of wealth and at its worst just blatant hypocrisy. But even so, that's a controversial historical matter. And we shouldn't forget that Senica did offer all of his riches to Nero in an attempt to extract himself from the political court. I mean, he didn't think it was all important. And perhaps people don't talk about that episode from Senica's life as much where he was in fact willing to and attempted to give up his properties, give them to Nero in order to revert to a more peaceful life, perhaps a life with more leisure. And that's uh and that's interesting because many people of course seek freedom through their wealth. There's this concept of FU money, you know, money that gives you the power to work however you want with whoever you want, doing whatever you want. You know, having enough money to afford that ability to reject any request, make any insult, whatever it may be. But of course there's the uh I think there's a this the stoic point that if you require fu money to be free there's the concern that material objects have already come to own you know why can't you be free now is the you know is more money in your bank account really holding you back from being who you want to be you know if you dedicate yourself to the venture of becoming rich. Are you putting off the project of becoming excellent and are you really going to obtain financial freedom in a way that matters? It's sort of interesting to see both sort of projects of amassing huge amounts of wealth in order to live how you want and the more frugal project of something like fire. It's a stands for financial independence and retiring early, which is more of a frugal matter. You know, saving money, making sound investments, probably still making a non-trivial amount of money, but at any rate, saving enough money to retire early uh in order to live one's best life, as it were. Both of those projects in a way are kindred spirits. they sort of share that same goal or at least assumption that uh one can achieve happiness or at least achieve significant parts of one's life plan through amassing sufficient externals. They're just haggling over the amount of externals that are required one might say. And uh so I think that's why of course Senica says if you wish to have leisure either be a poor man or resemble a poor man. And in particular is a kind of rejection of requiring externals at all requiring any level of wealth for living well. Now, of course, there's the uh necessary caveat that some of your roles, obligations, and such may require wealth. Probably in fact do require some level of wealth. You need to take care of your family and such. Obviously, likewise, some people their talents might push them towards a career that ends up with them becoming exceptionally rich and perhaps the career in itself was useful or perhaps they're able to use their riches to build a legacy uh that matters. Of course, there's there are still those cases, but but I think the central point still holds even with those caveats, which is that of course as a stoic, you're aiming to not let externals in any way dictate your life in and of themselves. Of course, you need to make good choices with regard to them. and uh wealth is preferable to believe that. They think it was ideal better to be rich than poor generally speaking though both of them have their risks. Uh and perhaps there's some level uh at which it would not be preferable to have more wealth. That that could that could also be true. But nonetheless, you know, the central point is that one doesn't want material things to own you and that can material things. You know, it sounds a little bit uh reductionistic. I think a lot of problems people have with wealth probably comes from the social obligations as well. These sort of claims to time and claims that reduce the ability that we're able to dedicate towards proper leisure. And of course, by leisure here, Senica isn't talking about loafing around on the couch, scrolling through Instagram, what have you. He's talking about free time where you're able to explore perhaps the natural world, interact with great works of art. Of course, uh, Senica himself practices reading these who to him would have been ancient thinkers and pondering on the teachings of the ancient stoics himself as well as other uh, philosophers such as Epicurus who who he is exceptionally fond of quoting in his lectures. And it's this ability to have leisure that can be granted by poverty. It's not necessarily granted by poverty, of course, but without the demands on one's time, the sort of constant sense that one must amass either more goods, more success, more prestige, what have you. you're able to craft out some time, set some time aside in order to think a life driven by the craving of power and wealth that's going to crowd that out. And uh I think that's why many find it better to take pay cuts in order to not just set aside time for leisure but work on what they see as their calling, carve out more time for family and add uh more leisure to their life. I think decisions like these often put excellence before uh riches. So I think if if I step back I see some of the one of the lessons here. Of course there's that there's that general teaching. Wealth has its risks. It can corrupt. It can uh has a sort of self-perpetuating force perhaps. It's involved with all these social vices. All these things are certainly true. But fundamentally of course the Stoics see that dependence on externals as the most serious risk and that doesn't necessarily come from you know the levels of wealth one might initially think of. I think I think something like fire can be pursued well. But it's also possible that for some people you the very pursuit of something like trying to live a minimalist life uh retiring early or something of this sort can involve the same sort of fantasies that pursuing wealth uh can you know that that picture that I'll be happy when I am you know I have this amount of money in my bank account is uh and I don't have to work for others or something like this you know is that really true that's not of course what stoics and happiness consistent no matter how low the number is. What matters more is uh not being owned by external objects, not what those objects are, how many of them there are and so on. And uh so although the Stoics are of course often quite negative on wealth that is a because of who they're teaching that that's largely an artifact of who they're speaking to and uh who they in fact were. They of course also think there are risks with uh any level of economic success or failure as it were. And what Senica is promoting here is that ability to use your time well. practically don't make the mistake of tying yourself to material goods of setting expectations that things must be this way and that you know that can only be obtained with uh financial success. That's why it's better to live as a poor man to not have the expectations of wealth uh distracting you. But of course, it's it's the ability to use time well that's invaluable. So whatever it may be, don't let the siren call of success distract you from that. That's a central lesson, central theme. Becoming happy matters more than becoming rich, powerful, or successful. And I think that's true even if that's I think that's certainly true even if you know you're not planning to achieve senica levels of success. Other levels of success may also be chamal. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. [music] If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at Stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions.
