---
title: "Conversation w/ Daniel Greco - Yale Professor of Philosophy"
slug: conversation-w-daniel-greco-yale-professor-of-philosophy
youtube_id: TyGbNzQHhss
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TyGbNzQHhss
upload_date: 2025-12-02
duration: 1:04:31
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

live. How are you doing? Thanks for joining me. >> Great. Yeah, thanks for having me. Looking forward. >> Yeah, really wanted excited to talk to you. Um been reading your stuff on Substack for a while. Um really think you you've got this background in you know academic really high level academic philosophy and then I think a real talent for writing these accessible meaningful pieces. Um we're going to talk talk about you know your substack writing and and your philosophy today. But to kick things off, I was interested in how um well your background in academic philosophy and then how you got into writing more popular philosophy or accessible philosophy. >> Yeah. So, uh background in philosophy. I I majored in philosophy in college. I actually started out college intendering intending to major in economics. Um and and that it comes across in this upstack. I uh maintained an interest in the field, but I ended up just really falling in love with my philosophy classes and kind of haven't looked back. Um, but yeah, then how we got into doing like Substack Popular Philosophy is really my my co-author on the blog, Matt Blonley, was like, "Hey, we should start a blog." And he was uh, you know, he was kind of nagging me about starting for a while. And eventually I said like, "Okay, fine. I'll I'll do it." Um, and now I post way more than him, like, and now I'm the one nagging him to to eventually post. Um, but part of the reason I I think especially now with another another baby, another new child, it's it's harder to get like really long blocks of time for writing uh writing academic papers. And so I was part of the appeal for me is like a totally selfish one that writing in in smaller chunks um where I I I don't worry about like being as exhaustive and citing the literature but just like try and get my book out there like it kind of lowers the bar to getting a thought out that maybe I'll then follow up with a more serious paper later on. like I I still have intentions uh with you know in that direction for some of my substack posts the one on fiction and empathy in particular given that is a more academic version of that. Um so yeah part of it was that with less time it seemed appealing to have a venue for writing where it wouldn't take us as as long to get something out as it does with an academic article which is you know a lot more. >> Yeah. So like a creative almost like creative output. It's a bit easier to just yeah to to write. There is that sort of that restrictive aspect of academic philosophy which you're talking about about being exhaustive and having all the footnotes in the right place and kind of uh reading the literature exhaustively as you said. >> I mean it's also just more you know there's more instant gratification to uh post it on Substack because you can immediately talk to people about it. me probably my favorite part of philosophy is talking to people about it like I love you know conferences and workshops and um so with my own writing of like the part that I like best is you know presenting it and getting you know talking to people back and forth and when it comes to journals that's just a really slow process like you know you write something uh you send it off maybe it's accepted a year after you sent it off between like getting rejected once or twice or editors taking a long time referees taking a long time with it and then once it's out like if somebody's going to reply to it that's another several years because they got to decide to read it. Um whereas you know in Substack you post something and people are commenting the next day. >> Yeah. I remember I was talking to somebody and they were like why are you doing philos one of my jiu-jitsu coaches and they were saying you know why are you interested in philosophy? And it's like well I love sharing these ideas. I love talking about these ideas. I I I want to expose you know ancient philosophy or stoicism to more people. And they're like, well, and how does academia like academia is one route to do that, but it's not the only route to do that, right? And if your goal is to have as many conversations as possible, you'd probably have more conversations or share with more people um if you posted these more public areas. And that was a bit of an epiphany for me where I was like I used was thinking, well, philosophy only happens in the academy, you know, that's the only spot for it. And I've been really impressed in Substack and Facebook and Discord. you you know those conversations you said, but also just the quality of the conversations. Um, and the amount of interest that people have. I don't say they're doing it recreationally, but it's it's like they're not professional. They're not philosophers in an academic context, but they're still incredibly well read and insightful and you have these interesting conversations. Um, has it been similar for you? Yeah, I mean I think philosophy especially should like or philosophers especially should feel some some obligation at least collective obligation in this direction. So I'm not saying everybody has to do it but why do I say that? Well like if you're you know a biochemist you say I don't care about making my papers accessible. I care about making drugs accessible. So like what are you you know what's the rest of society getting from my biochemistry? They're getting my drugs. um or you know you know other you know uh uh biochemical products that you know that I've created but with you know with philosophy like if um if it's going to benefit anybody like you know you have some idea if it's going to benefit anybody other than you I don't mean to say that just like the the pleasure of understanding something on your own is worthless I don't think it's worthless but still like if it's going to have some broader significance it's going to be because you uh made it intelligible to somebody else right it's not that you translated it into um product that can be enjoyed even if you don't understand the thinking that went into it the way that say drugs or or iPhones you are. >> Yeah. Well, and that's what I like about your Substack pieces. I find there's something actionable like I I um you one of our co-host Caleb he he had this general heruristic of like if you if you just if you debate something a for a long time and it doesn't make you do anything differently or it doesn't make you act differently like what was really the point in doing it and I I find or talking about it or understanding it and I find I mean I get those from your pieces and I want to kind of dig into some of those. Um, so on that line of of conversation, so you your your your piece, rationality, selfrust, and asset prices, I I really enjoyed that one. I want to start there. Um, what what does index investing have to teach us about practical epistemology and trusting our own judgments? >> Yeah. So, I'll say the the class that got me interested in epistemology or at least that made me think, oh, like that's the area of philosophy that I really want to focus on. It was an undergraduate um philosophy of religion class actually, which was really unusually organized, right? It was not a survey. It was just like three topics and one of the topics was disagreement. Um and so you you think about this in the context of religion where I think you know why or how if at all could it be rational to believe in one particular religion when you know that there are people who are just as smart as you out there who believe other ones. Um but then like a common move that gets made is noticing this isn't really specific to religion. So like, yeah, maybe that's maybe there's a challenge here to believing in any particular religion, but you're also going to have a challenge to believing in uh you know, distinctive or controversial views that aren't widely shared about just about any topic. Um, and some people like somebody we read, Peter Vanimogan, thinks, okay, great. That just shows that there isn't a real threat to religion here because nobody's going to be broadly skeptical about controversial questions. So uh in his case he he basically wanted to deflect the skeptical challenge to religiously. My reaction to reading to that is yeah there is a really general skeptical challenge here. Uh you know I um find myself with all sorts of beliefs that I know aren't widely shared. Uh but reflected on the fact that both people disagree or that I might have might not have had the beliefs that I've been raised in a slightly different environment. But it's not clear that I'd thereby have been any worse placed to figure out the truth. Like that can induce a lot of uncertainty. Um okay. So I hadn't said anything about asset prices, but I um I think like a special case of this where I think this is absolutely right is beliefs about about things that are relevant to to asset prices. So like lots of people have beliefs about artificial intelligence like is it going to kill us all? Is it going to totally upend the labor market? Um, and I feel like most people, you know, you talk to, at least if they're like the kind of people that that uh go on Substack or that post on Substack, they're going to have their own takes. Um, but questions about, you know, the effects of artificial intelligence, like those are those are questions that people who've thought a lot harder about, you know, than I have or than most people have. um and not just thought a lot harder but they you know spent a lot more time on it because they have a lot of money writing on it. Um you know basically those are questions in which a lot of time and effort has already been invested by people who have a lot of skin in the game a lot of interest in getting answers right. Um and those views are reflected in things like the current value of uh Nvidia um and and other you know say assets that are kind of tied to the performance of artificial intelligence. So, like if I personally was inclined to think this is just a fad, it's just hype. Um it's not really going to go anywhere, I would thereby implicitly be thinking all these people who've spent lots and lots of time and money trying to um you know uh trying to figure out where to invest their resources a lot more than I have thinking about artificial intelligence. lots of them have decided that you know Nvidia is um worth investing a lot of money in right that's why it's its value has grown so much over the last 10 years so even if my like intuitive take was to think this is all hype um I think there'd be a powerful reason to to question that by seeing just how many people who invested how much a lot more time and money than I have and who I should think are no worse place probably better place than I to figure out the truth uh think that you know Nvidia is a good investment. Um, and I'm just using Nvidia as a special case, but like once you take seriously the fact that other people who are just as knowledgeable or, you know, more knowledgeable than you are, um, have thought really hard about a question and have made consequential decisions that embody answers to the question that then show up in asset prices. easy. I'm just picking AI and Nvidia because that's like a really easy example, but there are lots of other examples like you know maybe you think uh you know Trump is going to cause inflation go through the roof. Well, lots of people are trying to figure out exactly how much inflation there's going to be and their judgments are reflected in the difference between inflation protected Treasury bonds and not inflation protected Treasury bonds. And so if you're you're sticking with your own take rather than the take that's implicitly there in asset prices um that that to me strikes me as like epistemically hupistic. Yeah, that was the position that I took was was we generally think that that is a bad idea or you know if you if you if you're if you're bought into this idea of index investing if you're bought into this idea of just buying the market it's from you said it's like I'm not going to have some sort of edge over these experts who have skin in the game who spent their lifetime calculating this so I'm just going to kind of bet on maybe the average or you know trust trust that the these assumptions have been priced in and so what I was taking from the piece was um it's hubistic it's hubristic to then uh you know try to pick stocks but we do this all the time in other domains of our life as well we have that same kind of hubris it's an easy example of the stock market but we're like that elsewhere yeah I mean so the stock market is the easiest case because you you're kind of all betting on the same question and you know that there are people who have spent more time and money than you who like say like have uh uh you know skin in the game with respect to that that question. So like I think it's there it's easiest to make the case that if you think that inflation is going to be a lot higher than the market says like where do you get off? Um when it comes to other ca like other cases right I think it's um I I don't think the reasoning totally breaks down. I think it's just harder to make the really pointed case that in part because it's often harder to find the skin in the game, right? Like uh so, you know, I stuck with you um uh you know, religious belief. Um, but that's a case where it's not like there are people making lots of a a long string of practical decisions that turn on which religion is uh right or wrong and getting you know winning or losing money like making profits based on having been reliable enough about that the way that say people who have been u in um in asset markets for a long time you know have kind of earned up uh some credibility. So, if you're going to think that uh your or religious or moral or political beliefs are right, um even though I I I still think this kind of skeptical reasoning should like make you less confident, I I think it doesn't get as much of a bite because there's less pressure to think that people who disagree with you um are are likely similarly reliable because if they're still kind of in the game, they can't have been going radically wrong. The way that I would say like like if uh you know people trading Nvidia are you know still out there have plenty of money to trade they're probably not doing terribly at um at making decisions about uh about asset prices. >> Yeah. It almost seems to me like there's two kinds of there's two kinds of pursuits. There's ones that are like quantifiable or provide immediate discrete feedback and then there's ones that are like more amorphous. Like so religion is this example where um you could bet wrong and presumably you're only receiving feedback once when you die or something like this. [laughter] >> Yeah. And it's not communicable. Um but like other domains, I mean, I just generally think it's good advice. I'm just like persuaded by the skeptical argument. If you think about like diet and exercise or health more generally, if you think about, you know, you do Brazilian jiu-jitsu, that's something we talked about before we went live. Like that's a great example of let's not reinvent the wheel, you know, like what what are the world champions doing? What are the professional coaches advocating for? They've got skin in the game because if they make bad athletes, they lose their job or if an athlete performs performs poorly. And so I should almost I should defer to that person until I at least have a kind of extreme expertise that allows me to then, you know, think I' think I've gained some sort of knowledge. I just I I generally like that call for humility. Um is that is that is that tracking for you? Yeah, totally. I actually I I I was also about to bring up jiu-jitsu and this connection. Um, so I think part of what makes a lot of people who like jiu-jitsu like it is this uh this kind of account we have of the the the history or the lore of the sport where in the battle days like in in the 80s and and 90s um and before then you know people would have these arguments about like which you know what would win in a fight like would would Bruce Lee beat up Mike Tyson or or what um and we have the stereotype of practitioners of traditional martial arts um that you know don't really have a sportive component still being caught up in those arguments. Whereas we realized no like you the only way to settle those questions is to set up the kinds of institutions that allow for that kind of testing and feedback and seeing what works and seeing what doesn't work. Um you know mixed martial arts um and it didn't and that's not even totally self- serving like maybe at the beginning it seemed like oh and it vindicated us jiu-jitsu is the best. I mean really it's not like people already did jiu-jitsu. Rather people saw it work so well in uh you know UFC and and Pride and I think that was a big part of what drove its popularity. Um but even now I think most of us jiu-jit jiu-jitsu practitioners would probably honestly admit that you know um pure jiu-jitsu is not the best thing to do for success in mixed martial arts. Like nobody in mixed martial arts does uh pure jiu-jitsu without you know rested and striking. except for maybe like a Cone Gracie or something and like that it's not it's not I mean even he's doing striking but it's not viable now. So there's that idea of what jiu-jitsu brought was like um a way of getting concrete feedback. Um it was like and that's that difference with traditional martial arts. I mean we can go down this martial arts rabbit hole like love talking about this stuff but like I always see that that issue with traditional martial arts is that you're not getting the feedback. you're like, "Well, don't don't actually try to do the technique to me because it's too dangerous. Don't actually hit me full out." And then it's like, even if the technique is hypothetically better or more efficient, it becomes practically worse because you're not getting immediate actionable feedback about your defense or and and so yeah. >> Yeah. >> And I would say about these traditional like martial arts that are uh build as being more like realistic and street ready like Prav Magga, right? we do, you know, ball twist in and eye gouging. And I said, "Well, have you ever really tried to gouge out somebody's eyes when they're really trying not to let you?" Like, I don't I don't know what the obstacles to that. I haven't tried to do that. I haven't tried to twist somebody's balls. How easy it is to grab balls through jeans. I don't know. And you're never going to find out either because you're not really going to have somebody full 100% trying to to twist balls because you just wouldn't get any training training partners that way. um you know feel good for my coach has this joke where you can only practice eye gouging twice and then it's like so you you can't you can't do it many times. >> Yeah. >> So I mean you know this is kind of gruesome but um what was that uh the the tournament that choke was about right Hick um I want to say it was one of the ah there's one of these early 90s tournaments which really was no holds barred and somebody did lose sight in one eye. I'm not going to remember his name. is a I think a Japanese fighter u who was against a much bigger taller um uh French uh kickboxer um >> I want to say Gerard Gourd >> it was yeah is the guy who came second in the first UFC. Yeah. >> Um uh and uh and the guy who got his eye gouged out still did beat that other guy using you know um uh uh submission grappling techniques. I think it was some kind of leg lock. But yeah, now we don't let people do that cuz what insane people are going to want to uh go in first where they're likely to be blinded. >> So what this um what this is making me think of what is your approach? So then we talked about these two tracks and there there's these domains that you have kind of concrete, discreet, measurable feedback and I don't think there's really any excuse for being hubistic in those domains. At least that's my opinion. Um but what do you do religion I think in ethics in the same way when um it seems to be more based on intuition or it's it we don't have this conc concrete kind of victory condition I made more money than you I ran faster than you what is the approach to epistemic humility or disagreement and those kinds of domains >> yeah I mean I think it's just harder to justify extremes of confidence um in in domains where you get less feedback, right? So, uh I think it is reasonable for me to be extremely confident that if you take uh take somebody that's trained a lot of wrestling and you take somebody that's trained a lot of taekwondo, neither has trained either, you know, anything else and you put them in a ring, I'm very confident about who will win because we've had lots of uh lots of experience. But you um uh we the domains you just mentioned I I I think in the face of disagreement we we just don't get the kind of signals we'd like for resolving who's more reliable, who's more trustworthy about those domains. Um I don't want to go all the way to saying, okay, so you've got to treat everybody as equally reliable and um you can't have any opinions about um about that kind of stuff. But I also don't have a a satisfying explanation for kind of what um uh you know what grounds any entitlement you have to have you know to have distinctive opinions of your own that um that differ from kind of the average of kind of informed world opinion or even how you decide who counts as informed opinion. I mean, in part, I think the reason that we don't get a a a skeptical argument going really quickly is if we could say, well, here are all the reliable. Here are all these people that are equally reliable and they all disagree. Uh so, um so your opinion should be kind of some average of what all these equally reliable people think. Uh we we can't even get that far because we can't say who are all the equally reliable people. So, if anything, we say, well, look, maybe I think these people are reliable. They strike me as pretty reasonable. Uh, granted, I don't have some non-question begging argument for that and so I'm gonna hold that that view about who's trustworthy with some level of humility the way that I think I do have non-question begging arguments that wrestlers will be taekwondo fighters. Um uh so so yeah, basically what I'm saying is I think you don't end up having to be an across the board skeptic because uh we we can't argue that um all these equally reliable people uh disagree and so you have to have some opinion that's the the average of all their views. Um I think that there's nothing obviously wrong with having some distinctive views about who's more and less trustworthy about these squishier domains. Um but but those distinctive views aren't going to be defensible by solid non-question begging arguments. >> I mean that makes sense to me. So I understand right it's like we we shouldn't be hubristic in the areas where there's experts. We should be humble to the experts and then we shouldn't be hubristic in the areas where there's not experts and even more reason to be kind of cautious in those areas. That's what I was taking your position to be. Um, so we can have some sort of confidence in I don't know the high confidence domains, but if you're not an expert, it probably just means relying on somebody else. Then the other ones, it's it's almost like um like again religion, ethics, um it's almost free form. I I wonder I do think about like I'm always thinking kind of like a stoic perspective on this. I wonder if the stoic argument is going to be something about how at least if we look at ethics, religion is a bit messier, but if we look at ethics, we can say is there some sort of unanimous agreement about what bad is or what wrong is and we can almost form some sort of negative picture or what kind of bad lives are. Uh maybe that's still a bit amorphous, but maybe we get some sort of agreement. Um, even if it's a vague position about, you know, some some types of lives are unambiguously bad. Maybe we can't decide what the good one is. Um, I don't that doesn't get us that far, but it gets us something. Maybe. >> That sounds right to me. >> Yeah. >> Might not might not solve it today. Um, and so anything else you wanted to anything else on this one? Um, that I thought that was a really interesting point. Um I might actually jump to another piece. Um how to cheat the thief of joy. >> Um and so what in in there you you out you know there's this there's this there's this dilemma or problem we have around um you know comparison and and how this hampers our capacity to be happy. And then you outlined I I thought it was really compelling three strategies against that. What are those strategies and could you speak to them each a bit? >> Yeah sure. I mean so first like a slight connection between um between what we were just talking about and this I feel like the the the way in which comparison can be the thief of joy like is is especially salient for those of us who are like disposed towards being uh excessively competitive and so like maybe if we do that's you I feel like that's probably me. Um, okay. So, one, I think part of the reason that our tendency to judge how well we're doing by comparing um ourselves to other people is so poisonous is that um we tend to compare ourselves to our our friends, our social circle, like people that are around us, you know, that that we encounter, you know, every day. Um, and in an important way that's like a super skewed sample because I think pretty much anybody watching on Substack right now should think of themselves as you know radically fortunate like part of a really select unusual group of people that are um, you know, alive at the the most prosperous time in history. Um so so yeah this this first strategy is to try to keep a sense of perspective of just how um how good almost everybody not everybody in the world but but um almost everybody in the world has it now compared to 200 300,000 2,000 years ago uh no matter where you look. So like even you know comparing yourself to um to kings um you know 500 years ago like if a king or like feudal lord 500 years ago if he woke up and said to some servant of his you know I would really like some beans from from halfway around the world that can't be grown grown within a thousand miles of here. I'd like those beans dried and crushed up and steeped in hot water. Um I think because I think that would get me going and you know as Vas would say like I'm I'm sorry Lord there's just nothing we can do. Those aren't growing for a thousand miles from here. Um uh whereas you know I can do that on a whim uh three times a day if I want. Um I did today. Uh or or if that that same lord wants you know strawberries in winter. Sorry he's screwed. But um I could have strawberries in winter you know just uh on a whim. um for music, right? Like it was a huge thing to have like live performers, right? Now I can listen to the greatest music ever written uh at the push of a button. And it's hard to I think maintain a constant sense of amazement at just how like near omnipotent we are compared to people uh in the past. Um, but I still think it's worth trying because the more you can the more uh anything that's like not going well in your life for where you know some you know in philosophy somebody got a journal an article accepted in a journal where you just got an article rejected like it it can seem really trivial when you think about how lucky you are um compared to almost everybody. >> I really like that argument for two reasons. I mean one the Stoics make all the time these arguments about how a lot of our unhappiness comes from just our perspective and so there's a lot of work in perspectival shifts and Marcus Aurelius talks about this exercise of the view from above and just kind of shifting your perspective not being so self obsessed or or changing like the context you're you're thinking about. But I also like it because it's almost like self-defeating. And it's almost like, well, if you're going to compare, compare properly. You know, if you're going to compare yourself to other people, really compare yourself to other people. And by like all people, and by that criteria, you're actually doing pretty amazing over the over the course of history. It's like, yeah, if it's just you and the other person who got their journal article accepted. Yeah. But that's not really a fair comparison. It's like compare properly, which I I like. >> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Okay. So, that was the first strategy, right? The second strategy was look if you can't help but compare yourself to uh these other extremely fortunate people in your social circle because I admit that is like the natural thing to do um it helps to have idiosyncratic dimensions of comparison. So this is really an idea I get from um no um there's uh it's somewhere in anarchy state utopia. There there are like lots of interesting ideas just uh all over the place in the book. Um but the idea is if you think of like status competition as uh undid dimensional right there's just one dimension of status and uh you know if if I go up on it then any gains that I've had are are exactly counteracted by uh losses of the people that I've passed. That's a kind of really bleak picture. Um but uh it doesn't have to be that like and and maybe if you thought that status was just about you know wealth or something then yeah like if I get and all that matters is you know how much wealth I have compared to other people um then we get that kind of bleak picture um but there are lots of dimensions which are you done >> I'm still here my camera >> uh okay yeah but it doesn't so the the nos thought was we can have lots of different dimensions of status um and where different people place different weight on dimensions of status. So the way that I put it in the um in the post, you know, you can imagine uh the the Philistines that just care about wealth and the Bohemians who just care about art and maybe the Philistines are uh they feel good about themselves for being wealthier than the Bohemians and the Bohemians can feel good about themselves for being more creative and original than the Philistines. Um, and now, you know, status competition doesn't have to seem as as zero sum and as as tragic. Um, so, okay, what does that mean? And then just an aside that I have is like the internet is great for this because now we can have all sorts of you know idiosyncratic uh communities that value different sorts of things where almost anybody can feel um like special and distinctive and you know doing well along some idiocratic dimension of comparison that most people um you know just don't think about. Um, and so the the kind of tongue-in-cheek way that I put this in the post to again tie back to jiu-jitsu that we've been talking about, um, is, you know, those, uh, people that have, uh, you know, more citations than me and just got a, you know, papers into journals that rejected my journal or rejected my paper. Still, in most cases, I could beat them up, um, because, you know, I do jiu-jitsu and they don't do jiu-jitsu. Now, that doesn't bother them because they don't care as much about jiu-jitsu. Maybe they care about uh care about other stuff. Um, but the point is if if each of us has it doesn't just invest all of our ego and self-worth and and you know, concerns about comparison and status in one dimension of um uh one dimension of that, but has a bunch of different ones. Then there never has to be somebody else who we think is just strictly speaking doing better than us. we can always find something we really care about where things are going better for us than for them. And this is meant to be very much a kind of second best approach. Like if you can just not be so focused on comparing yourself to other people, great, do that. But realistically, many of us can't. And so um being able to uh to reassure ourselves that even somebody else who's doing great along these various dimensions, they're happy to me along this other dimension and I really care about that one too. Um that's the second strategy that I discussed in the post. Yeah, great. I mean, I I'm not sure how much you people care or you care about seeing me. I tried to read the comments and accident accidentally pressed the button and then cannot figure out how to reactivate my camera, which is part of doing it live. Um, we we'll keep going. I might try a little bit, but um at the risk of closing the whole thing, I I might be cautious. Um audio only for me. Um yeah, no. So, so I mean two points there. I I think it's a really good strategy. It's one I've used myself. I think it was kind of irony when I read your post and you'd be like I would be world champion at jiu-jitsu and philosophy and then I feel I'm like that's my idiosyncratic. So for those like I have I have but for those that don't know I have a PhD in philosophy and then I'm a Brazilian jiu-jitsu black belt. So you put that and I was like oh no we're now we've now created our own little side competition. >> Yeah infer you you'd definitely be beating me at jiu-jitsu. >> Yeah but I think you you have much better philosophy. So, um, but I was just a little joke where it's like you you try to run away into your idiosyncratic mix and then you find the other person who's really good at, uh, your your two things and you're like, "This can't be." Um, the the the the logical extreme of that. So like I just think it's good advice and it's been like practically effective in my life and I found a lot of meaning and joy in being like I'm the best at kind of best is again there's some unhealthiness to trying to be the best as you've raised but you know I'm particularly good at this unique mix of things that are interesting and eclectic and unique to me. Um, which I think is a better it's a better life strategy if you're trying to maximize happiness than trying to be I'm going to just be the best basketball player and I'm going to be only do basketball and then when I end up just, you know, not becoming LeBron James because that's so incredibly impossible and hard to do, um, I'll feel like a failure. the the but so so I I I really like it as a strategy, but I kind of feel like the logical extent the logical extreme of that logical conclusion is just being happy with being yourself. Like the ultimate idiosyncratic mix of characteristics are just all the things you happen to like in all the ways that are unique to you. And so it almost kind of wraps full circle and you kind of leave the status or comparison game if you keep going with it. Um what do you think about that? Yeah, I like the point. I mean, and and maybe if you can do that, great. Um I think there are probably limits to what um what we can get ourselves to to care about, right? So um you know if uh thinking of like really uh uh if yourself is is just things are going terribly for you along all sorts of dimensions then even though you can identify as some really just like some distinctive you know thing that you've got that nobody else has but it's not something that like seems good at all then but like I'm the only person whose uh you know whose third and fourth fingers on their hand are exactly like the ratio between them that that my third and fourth fingers on my hand are like I I'm maybe the best at having that ratio, but I'm just who could get themselves to care about that? >> Um, so yeah, I think there are probably psychological limits to how far you can push this strategy. [laughter] I mean I mean yeah I mean your point is it's got to be a mix of things that are meaningful both to yourself and probably to society in some capacity and if you're like >> yeah I think that's a good way to put it basically I I think they're probably psychological constraints on what I can get myself to find meaningful and um and that can still leave a lot open right there can be things that I don't care about right now that if I kind of invested effort in I could get myself to appreciate and then um you know then care about but but not just anything. >> Yeah. And then so what was the what was the third one? >> Yeah. I mean it's sort of an extent m maybe not that different from where we just were. Um but the thought was some um uh sorry I'm just hanging up. Uh I'm getting a call and a um so some things that we care about lend themselves more to comparison than others. Um so maybe the more sort of quantifiable something is um the more we can then compare our you know quantity with respect to that to to somebody else's. Um but then some things um some experiences or activities or or mentions of value, they just don't lend themselves to comparison at all. And so um we're just less uh to the extent you care about that the question of how you're doing, you know, compared to somebody else is just much less likely to to strike you as salient. And so the example I gave was was parenting where there are all sorts of, you know, wonderful aspects of parenting. like I love reading to my kids at night. um you know uh sharing enjoyment of stories that I read when I was a kid or maybe you know reading stories that uh I didn't read when I was a kid and and sharing enjoyment of those and it just doesn't like if somebody else is reading those same stories and his kids are also liking those stories with him that doesn't feel like it takes away at all from my enjoyment of my stories with my kids um in the way that maybe you know being beaten at jiu-jitsu does feel like it takes away from the you pride that I take in in jiu-jitsu. Um, and I think there probably a lot of things like that. So I I drew this connection to um this distinction that Kieran I never know how to say his name Setia or Sataya say um Kia draws between what he calls telic and atlic projects and roughly like tilic projects are like things that you can complete like you know climbing Mount Everest like okay I've done that um and with tlic projects you're they just lend themselves more to kind counting and comparing. So once you've climbed Mount Everest, you can say well who else has climbed Everest? Um you know have they also climbed K2 like how many mountains can I climb? Whereas at projects or well atlic uh ends or or or pursuits I think projects are more the tick uh uh things. there. It's more like uh walking or listening to music uh or or reading where you're less likely to chunk it up into uh into units and then think, "Okay, I'm done with this." Um uh and so I think of like uh parenting as one of these kind of uh atelic projects where um it's just much less natural to think of it in terms of you know milestones that that you've reached in your parenting or like not comparing you know how many kids you have. Uh oh no I've got you know this many kids but somebody else has more got to catch up. I feel like those questions just don't feel nearly as pressing as um uh as questions of comparison do when we're thinking about things more like um that are that are more easily quantifiable or that more let that more lend themselves to quantification and comparison like these like explicitly competitive pursuits uh like you did. >> Yeah. Well, so two two thoughts on this. One is it seems to me like you can approach the the same craft telically or atelically and the jiu-jitsu the it's like I want to get a black belt or I even want to get a blue belt and you see the kind of frustration that comes on grading day when the person doesn't get a stripe or they don't get a blue belt. Um and I I I think about this about you know I've been a black belt for nine years now. I I'm still training consistently. It's just like it's not about it's not about belt any there's no more belts. I'm just doing it as as as because I I enjoy the kind of the art of it um instead of the goal. And I I was thinking that as well by your parenting example like you say that parenting is atic but um you know we're we're expecting our our first child and um >> congratulations. >> Yeah, thank you. But like baby Instagram makes it seem very comparison. There is like there is this real temptation when you get on parenting social media to be oh you need to be a good parent or you need to do things like this. And so it almost feels like I get your point that it's probably when when it's quantifiable, it probably lends itself to being completionist in that way. Uh probably lends itself more easily to that. But I think you you could probably frame or approach things either the the healthy way or the unhealthy way. The telic way or the the atelic way is one thought. >> Yeah, I think that's a great great point, right? Um, so yeah, we probably shouldn't talk about telic activities or pursuits more it's I think you're right to say it's more like a mindset. Um, >> and uh I think jiu-jitsu can be done in this tick way where you care about getting the belt or winning competition and and I think yeah, like you say that does often lead to, you know, I mean there's a stereotype in jiu-jitsu. People get the blue belt and then they're done. Um, >> I feel like my kids are I I will sometimes have this exchange with them where they'll be like, "Oh, you know, do you think we're going to get another belt at some point?" I'm kind of inclined to say like, "Who cares about the belts? It's just a piece of piece of cloth. Uh, you know, just enjoy doing jiu-jitsu." Um uh and yeah then even with things that like say parenting that strike me as uh atic where it seems less natural to go in for the comparison. You're totally right that um you can find plenty of people on social media you know bragging about how early their kids walked or read or oh my infant was you know potty trained before they were four months old. >> You do hear these I don't know if it's all competition but hear stories about people like holding you know infants over the toilet. Um, none of my kids have been potty trained like before they're 3 years old. Um, uh, I I guess for me, I find it easier to ignore that. It may help that we homeschool. So, we're like, uh, we don't have kids in the same class as other kids where we're going to talk to, you know, uh, other parents of kids in the same class in ways that might make comparisons really salient. Um uh but yeah, I totally take the point that that's another trap that I imagine you can get, uh get drawn into. >> Yeah, I think it's just I guess it's just be careful about anything um anything approaching it this way unless that's intentional and there's a purpose for doing that because it's probably less satisfying um to to be incredibly goal goal oriented, less so as craft oriented. the the other thing this made me think of. So I I um obviously practiced stoicism and very deep in in that community for quite a long time. And one one thing that I think about stoicism is that I I wonder this distinction kind of made me realize something. I wonder if this if a a risk in in stoicism or philosophy as a way of life more generally is it makes life a kind of a tealic project. Like stoicism has this idea of the sage or this perfect person and everybody's striving to be this perfect like that is that is your target that is your goal that is your aim and it almost makes uh they they use a craft analogy all the time the same way a lot of ancient philosophers did about you know living well is this craft but but there's this almost this mountain to climb this like perfection to reach and I wonder if that's counterintuitive and it's kind of tripping off this comparison or unhappiness mechanism in people it's a it's a trap I find myself falling too. Um, what what do you think about what do you think about that? >> Maybe I'm just going to ask you more about your take on stoicism. So, we um uh I I was recently reading and I think you mentioned this in um uh email you sent uh before this. So, well, I'm teaching this great books class and and one of the things we read is is Senica on anger. Um, and I mean he had so he basically thinks you should never get angry and it's within your power to never get angry. Um, it's not not just anger, but this is just an example like uh you think somebody kills your parents, this is an example he gives. Uh, well, you should try to avenge them, but there's no need for anger. That's not gonna [laughter] happen. is I have a much easier time reading that text as describing a kind of psychologically unattainable ideal um in a way that then I'm less likely to beat myself up for not reaching it than what I think he intends which is no he really does think it's in our power uh to never get angry because he thinks getting angry is always a voluntary decision and you like there's the kind of initial impulse to his anger but you have to agree to it to kind of let it take over you to actually get angry and you can just never do that. Um, and yeah, I kind of want to go halfway in thinking a lot of the things that he says about like the ideal of the kind of um that the person who doesn't get angry are attractive and it's not um but I also don't really think it's realistically in my power to do that and and it's also maybe luckily like not that you know quantifiable how how close or far I to to achieving it. So, um maybe this is just me not like being part of the stoicism community, but it's a bit hard for me to imagine like getting competitive with other people over how um uh you know how in control of our emotions we are. Um so, you see that guy like he you know he got angry last week. I haven't angry in five months. I don't know that that um is it like that? It's hard for me to imagine. >> I don't think it's competitive like inter people. I mean, there might be it might be I don't want to speak for the whole community. I don't feel competitive with other stoics, but you feel competitive with yourself. >> I'm even less competitive. >> What's that? >> No, sorry, that's a bad bad joke. I said, I bet I'm even less competitive. >> Yeah. Yeah, you're even better at it. Um yeah, I was I was status signaling there. Um the but I think you get competitive with yourself because there's this there's this goal and I mean the way I was interpreting your thing is well these these problems kind of go away if you don't actually see it as a goal you see it as maybe a model or an example or a thought experiment but if you take it as uh you know that that is actually a way that you should be and you're failing if you're not the sage um then so there there there's there's personal competitiveness or personal sense of failure right like uh Um, if I'm trying to climb Everest, I don't think I need to I don't think the unhappiness needs to come necessarily from I, oh, that other person climbed Everest and I didn't. The unhappiness can be um I didn't climb the mountain. I didn't achieve the objective goal even though maybe that's not feasible for me because, you know, I I I'm older or I I'm sickly in some capacity. And so instead of me just loving the craft, I have this kind of like objective standard I'm trying to reach, like making it to the NBA for the basketball example or something like this. And um I do think that's the case and that's the kind of competitiveness at least I have with myself. Um and yeah, I mean the point that I'm taking from what you were saying is one way to get around this is to just just, you know, not try to be a sage, just try to be a better person. Not try to be perfect, just try to be a better person. But I do think the Stoics are committed philosophically to the idea that the other that that perfect person is possible. They spend way too much time talking about what the person is like and what would happen if they got drunk or what would it be happen if somebody tried to fool them um for for them to not be committed to it. >> Yeah. No, I I agree that was certainly um uh the the more kind of modest view in the neighborhood of Senica that I was describing. I don't read that as his view. I I think he >> thinks the um uh it is within all our powers to to be sist. >> Yeah. Great. >> Um so maybe I mean maybe my my take away from that there is just maybe I'll consider um I I still don't know if I if I found a happy answer about you know is there a benefit for it being a telic project? Is there a reason to hold on to that or should I just treat it atically which would be you know trying to pursue the craft of being a better person. I think there's still something for me to chew on there. >> There is this analogy in epistemology where um we like like norms of rational belief like uh consistency and and coherence. Um let's just stick with like consistency, right? uh um you know don't have any inconsistent beliefs or sometimes people put this in in probabilistic terms like your your opinions should be representable by um by levels of confidence that satisfy the probability activities. And most people who like that as a kind of picture of the kind of normative ideal for belief also think it's not humanly attainable to fully satisfy it. It's just not realistic. But you can still think like, look, whenever I notice I've got inconsistent beliefs, I'm going to think about how that might be resolved. Um, or whenever I notice, you know, um, a probabilistic incoherence, like, hey, I thought this was more likely than that, and this was more likely than that, but this was more likely than that. That can't be. You know, again, think about how I might iron that out without thinking I'm ever going to get to the spot where there are in principle no tensions, no incon, no incoherencies, you know, in my whole body of belief. Yeah. How do I get better at mountain climbing without, you know, judging my successful failure by climbing Everest? How do I get better at playing an instrument, without I can still give myself feedback if I misplay a note. That doesn't mean the only way to be a good musician is to be perfect. Um, make makes good sense to me. Um, the the last piece I wanted to get to was um your piece, Great Books, is Shelling Points. Am I saying that right? Shelling. >> Yeah. Yeah. So what what are shelling points and how do they explain the power of great books? >> Yeah. So Shellane was this uh mid-century economist. Um and he had the site he didn't call them shelling points but um [laughter] I can't remember what he called them but they've come to be called shelling points. U and I think they're best illustrated with an example. I'll use the one that I used in that post which is a slight modification of an example of his. Um, so you imagine two people are traveling in Paris together. They're traveling companions and they've gotten separated and this is before the era of cell phones, so they can't easily contact each other. Um, and they've got to, you know, they've got to find each other. Um, and maybe they've like all they know is they're both in Paris, right? They haven't gotten a hotel yet. There there's like no kind of obvious place based on their shared plans for where they're going to meet. What do you think they're going to do? And Shelling's thought was they'll meet someplace like the Eiffel Tower, right? Because they'll think what's just the most obvious like salient point that I know the other person's going to be thinking about in Paris. It's the Eiffel Tower. So they'll both go to the Eiffel Tower and they'll be maybe not a guarantee, but like you know, they're going to do better than than chance if they were just randomly picking places to go. Uh and so more generally the we can talk about shelling points in a situation where we've got uh what what economists will call a coordination game where we care much more about coordinating our behavior than we do about exactly what we do. So another example would be like driving. Um >> in the US we drive on the right in the UK they drive on the left. Doesn't really matter which one you do though it does matter that everybody picks the same one. Um so in that sense like everybody driving on the right that's a shelling point. Everybody driving on the left that's a shelling point. Um some people driving in the um you know people driving different places like the or some on the left some on the right. That's not sorry that maybe that's not actually a great exa u uh I think the best way to think of it is when we have a coordination game right um uh a solution to the game that suggests itself because you know that other people will be thinking in those terms that's a shelling point. So I shouldn't actually say that driving on the right or the left is because nothing really distinguishes the right versus the left. Um but but it's more that when like there are a bunch of places you could go and all of them would be equally good to meet up at but we pick this one because we know the other person would be thinking of it. That's what a shelling point is. Okay. So, what does that have to do with great books? Um, I think not all reading, but a lot of reading, especially reading about ideas, especially reading philosophy, has a coordination game aspect to it. Um, in that part of what we care about, not all of what we care about, but part of it is reading stuff that other people are reading. And that might sound like silly, like, oh, I just want to read stuff that's trendy or popular. But I don't think it has to be silly. I think it can be for very good reason. Um, I think it can be because part of why we read things is to be able to have conversations with other people. It's like to to share a kind of common intellectual language. And to the extent that that's part of why we read uh works of philosophy, then it matters more that we coordinate that we read the same things than that uh we each try to read the best things because if we each try to read just what's best then there's a good chance that we're going to disagree about what's best and um and we'll read different things and it'll be harder for us to communicate. Uh so say uh example from the post um uh you know we want to read some um something that gets across the idea of utilitarianism um or or or stoicism say um uh with utilitarianism like Mill is a really good choice not because Mill is the best expositor of the utilitarian picture. I don't think he is. Uh but because if all I know is that um that we're all trying to read something utilitarian, well, Mill is the one that I know everybody else is going to be thinking of. Um and so if we've got to make this decision without being able to kind of all talk it out, then uh Mill is relevantly like the Eiffel Tower when it comes to utilitarianism. And that's why in our great books class, we have students read Mill, you know, trying to pick what we think the best kind of contemporary up-to-date version of utilitarianism is. And I might say something similar with uh with Senica, right? Is um uh you know, is that absolutely the best statement of the Stoic worldview? I don't know. Probably not. Probably we could do better. But uh it helps to have these kind of touchston so that we're at least all on the same page and discussing these ideas. Um which is why I think it's nice to have these um have a cannon. um and to um and why I think we should be cautious or wary about trying to too quickly update or change the cannon to replace works in it with better works because to the extent that we do that the likely outcome is that people go in different directions. Everybody has different ideas about what the better replacements are and we end up failing to coordinate you know relevantly like uh the people who are you know um trying to meet in Paris but instead of just picking the place that the other person would be thinking of the Eiffel Tower they pick what they think is the best spot in Paris and and since everybody's doing that like they don't meet up. >> Yeah. I I thought it was a really compelling point which is that the I mean as you said that the cannon is about coordination especially in something like philosophy. I mean, how many conversations do you have where even when you're trying to explain something new, it's like it's like Kant but or it's like um you know, it's like Plato but this difference and like so there's that there there's that huge coordination value of being able to situate um what you're talking about in relation to something else somebody said. And that value I said this in the piece, Eiffel Tower isn't the best building. It isn't the nicest building, but that's not what's being measured for when you're saying let's meet there. It's it's what is the most effective point of coordination. And so you you can't replace things quickly. And there's not only can you not replace them quickly, there's a real danger to getting that wrong. I thought that was that was very um it was very compelling. It seems to me like it has I mean some some risks where you end up coordinating around the things that are I guess I I guess my next question would be what is the best way to then update the cannon? Is there a way to do that effectively that isn't just the cannon is not just self-reinforcing which is this was the this was the reference point. This was the coordination point. It's too dangerous to change it. Uh especially because we're not talking about six friends meeting at a bar. We're talking about 70-year-old philosophers who went to school and you know 18year-olds since you're coordinating over such a long period of time. Um is there sort of any way you you talk about the new narratives and the history of philosophy in the piece. Is there a way to update the cannon effectively? Um, >> yeah, >> I tend to think like very slowly. Um, >> so, >> so first I should say I think some shelling points are really really I'm not saying the cannon is like this, but I think some shelling points are rightly really really sticky. So an example that economists like is uh the certy keyboard. Um, like that was not designed to be easy to type with. It was designed so that typewriter keys wouldn't get stuck. And so if you were trying to design an optimal keyboard now for like ease of you know fast typing and you know ergonomic stuff, you would not design the pretty keyboard. Um but I think we may be stuck with that for all time. Uh or at least like for the foreseeable future because I don't think there's any good way to like kind of gradually gently move away from that in a way that's like worth the uh throwing off all these people who already know how to type. Um, I don't think the cannon is like that though because when it comes to like I mean it's already kind of weird to be talking about this with great books courses because there just aren't as many of them as there used to be and so we're already kind of moving away from them. But I I still think it's worthwhile to try and do that relatively slowly um so we can get a chance to see whether we've managed to coordinate on something else. Right? So, uh, if >> everybody agrees, look, we're basically going to, you know, keep a lot of the, uh, canonical books the same, um, in philosophy classes, in history of philosophy classes, we're going to read Plato, we're going to read Aristotle, um, you know, we're going to read Kant, we're going to read Hume. Um, but then there's some like, uh, uh, uh, you know, changing around the edges. Um, so, you know, maybe somebody reads Hegel, somebody else doesn't read Hegel. Um and uh you know somebody re like there are various people that aren't canonical but might be put in with that class and you know do that for a few decades and see if any of them kind of are significantly more popular than others in such a way that eventually we say you know what now actually now we really think like this thing is part of the cannon and and maybe similarly you like experiment with dropping something that you think the weakest member of the cannon like you can have maybe the analogy is um uh if you have like a you can have point A connected to uh point Z and there's not that much in common with them so long as A overlaps a lot with B and B overlaps a lot with C and C overlaps a lot with D. Um and so now you're thinking of these as points in time and like compositions of the cannon. thought was uh maybe eventually we can get from A to Z if Z is a better candidate but only by um uh never having too much dissimilarity between what people at different times in different places are reading because you know there's a lot of overlap A and B and a lot of overlap between B and C and so on. >> Yeah, that's compelling to me and I also I mean I'm definitely on on the team of great books like definitely definitely pro pro this. Um, it it it's also a way it um people talk a lot about the jiu-jitsu meta and I apologies for people listening that don't train jiu-jitsu, but we we both do, so I'm going to keep going back to this. And it's um you know, when you take a martial art, jiu-jitsu is relatively new. It's like 60 70 years, but there's some martial arts that have been around for for thousands of years like wrestling back in ancient Greece. And if you think of philosophy as a tradition, I mean at least in its in its modern form since the since probably the probably Oxford and in in the west um something like this, this is a really really long time period. And so to expect to expect a shift in 5 10 15 20 years is such a small it's it's such a small relatively small period of time even though that might be a substantive period of an individual's professional life. And so maybe that puts it to scale what moving slowly means when you're talking about a cannon that's a thousand years old, I guess, is what I'm trying to say. >> Yeah. And I I guess I also like, you know, I'm not a historian of philosophy, so the stuff that I like write on and and mostly talk to people at conferences is not this canonical stuff. Um, and so I I I like both having your kind of canonical intro classes. the composition of this I think should change pretty slowly but also thinking that shouldn't be you know the only stuff that people are are thinking or talking about. Um I think uh you know you want you want some kind of turn and experimentation for new ideas but it'll it'll probably take a long time for any new ideas to be you know broadly accepted and maybe eventually down the road make it into a candidate. >> Yeah. Um great. Well, I mean, there's more there's more I want to talk to you about on this, but maybe we'll have to do it another time. Um, Dan, really appreciate that was a lot of fun. Um, just for those listening, you know, any that happen to be coming from from um, you know, our audience, maybe if what are you working on? If they want to hear more from you, where can they find your writing or your work? Um, just yeah, quick quick kind of uh, spiel for for the for the listeners about where they can find more about what you're doing and what you're up to. I mean, I'm on Substack right here. I haven't been posting a ton this semester, but uh I'll be teaching less next semester and so I imagine I'll I'll get back to it more. And then I don't remember my the name of my website, but if you just Google me, um you know, Dan Greo Philosophy, uh you can find my academic work. Um yeah, nothing really on on stoicism, though. I do have a recent book out that um uh is it well if you have access to Oxford scholarship online you can read it online without the book um uh and if if you're a student you know through lushi you probably do so um give that a look I think especially like later on in the book it gets kind of in the weeds but I think the first uh two chapters are pretty broadly accessible well thank you so much okay thanks so
