---
title: "Dealing with Change (Episode 208)"
slug: dealing-with-change
episode_number: 208
youtube_id: n8X5f9NLzUA
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n8X5f9NLzUA
upload_date: 2025-11-04
duration: 44:43
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Michael Trombbley >> and I'm Caleb Montteros. >> And today we'll be talking about stoic strategies for dealing with change. Um this is something I wanted to talk about because this is some in stoicism we think a lot about focus on what's in your control. Focus on what's in your control. But there's also this part of stoicism which is also accept uh embrace the things that are outside of your control. Recognize what's outside of your control and have a healthy relationship with that as well. So it's both about caring about your character, your actions, your choices, putting the proper emphasis on the things that are up to you and then learning how to live in harmony in appropriate um in an appropriate relationship with the things that are not up to you. And so change is one of those things that is not up to you. Nothing remains how we want it to be. We might lose our job. We might have relationships change. At a grand level, everyone we know will die. The cities we live in will cease to exist. Um there is just the the world is in this state of permanent flux. >> Oh, it just started. Now I'm feeling all >> der. Yeah, exact [laughter] exactly. That gets you pumped up. I hope you're hope anyone listening to this is enjoying their nice evening walk um thinking about the idea of oblivion. Um but it's true right things change um bigger and smaller changes. Um we don't have the capacity to control or retain the things we like or want. We don't have the capacity to keep our life the way we want it to be. Um if there are parts of it that we that we do want to remain constant. Um so how do we deal with this? How do we overcome the kind of stress or anxiety that comes with that? I [snorts] want to look at three stoic strategies. Today, I've pulled out some quotes that I also think emphasize these strategies or elaborate on these strategies. And um I pulled these pulled these out and prepped this episode, but Caleb, as always, you'll be jumping in and um providing, you know, your feedback or insight as well. Any other context you wanted to add before we jump into it? Well, it's a great topic. It's a big one. And I was just thinking about change in my own life and how that how that changes it. I suppose you've got you've got change sort of in a sense of milestones, both positive and negative, as you say, entering a new relationship, ending a relationship, starting a new career, gaining loved ones, losing them. There's also a kind of change in the background circumstances of our life too that can shape things uh in a powerful way of course whether that's changes general change in the state of one's city the economy things you weren't expecting about your health or something of this sort both so change is big and small certainly something we're surrounded by and often catches one off guard so it's a good um good topic to revisit even if perhaps There's no change that you're struggling with now. >> Yeah. And I was just when you were thinking about the city, you giving that example of the city, the word nostalgia. Um, but it comes from feeling pain. Uh, it's a Greek or origin, but it's about feeling pain about wanting to return home or wanting to return to the way things used to be. Um, and so you can almost think of that of this nostalgia, this longing for oh this my city was so much better back in the day or do you remember how things used to be or this period of your life that you you look back upon um positively but but it almost hurts because there's that feeling of I can't get back there or things have changed in a way that I can't return to. That's an important part of it too. >> Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. [snorts] >> Great. So, I'll jump into it and get get um you your insight as we go as well. So, the first strategy and really that's this is why I started this episode is I wanted to just think more carefully about this quote. It's a famous Epictitus quote. Um but the first strategy is to I would say it's to emphasize your connection with nature and change as a part of nature. So maybe it's this idea that you know things aren't happening to you. You're a part of what is happening which is being a part of nature and nature is constantly changing. Um you know and and when we recognize we're part of nature then maybe we focus a bit more on how lucky we are were to have the thing in the first place rather than thinking I'm kind of this this separate you know I'm Michael. I'm separate from the world. I want to keep the world a certain way and the world kind of chugs along without me and it makes me sad. Um the quote for this is from Epictitus handbook 11 or the quote that made me think of this strategy and Epictitus says never say about anything I have lost it but rather I have given it back. Is your child dead? It is given back. Is your wife dead? She is given back. Is your farm taken away? Well that is also given back. And a student says, "But the person who took it was bad. And does it matter to you through what means the giver demanded it back? For so long as he gives it to you, take care of it. But as something that is not your own, as travelers, uh, sorry, let me let me try that last part again. Um, for so long as he gives it to you, take care of it. But take care of it as something that is not your own." As travelers treat an inn. Um, so the there's there's this view here and and you know I said emphasize your connection with nature and he's like think of it as as not belonging to you. But I I really do think the root cause of this kind of uncomfortableness with with change or or the kind of symptom you might feel here is what I was trying to get at is like these things belong to me. I'm kind of separate from the world. This is my this is my house. This is my my sibling. my my my my child, they belong to me. And when they're taken from me or things change, somebody has deprived me of something. Somebody has unjustly taken something from me. And Epictitus' point of giving it back is that, you know, really, you're just a part of this changing universe. You're this part of this changing world. um you had this opportunity to be in this moment of time, spend time with this loved one, have this unique experience, live in this unique place. Um but that was never owed to you and never belonged to you and it continues uh you know continues along the same path as all other things does. It continues along this path of change and so you you know it wasn't taken from you. it just returned to nature or returned to um from where it came. And so there's not this sense of I guess it is there's this this shift of I'm not deprived of things when things change. Rather, oh my opportunity to enjoy it, that chance I had has kind of run out. And I think that's a it's an important mindset shift. It's one that I struggle with. Um but what do you think about that, Caleb? Well, I suppose the main idea is that the something that of course the Stoics hold so much of our suffering is a result of mistaken judgments and Epictitus is stating that we assume things belong to us in a way they don't and it's that assumption that causes us uh so many it causes it us to not accept the the inevitab you know the reality of change and that's uh both before it happens and perhaps when it happens and so that's it's sort of a mix of a diagnostic and then with a strategy for managing managing change. >> Yeah. And this strategy the strategy then is this shifting from I have lost it to it is given back which reframes the change from again some sort of wrongdoing or deprivation to something natural something normal um which it which it is and I think so much of these these cognitive mistakes as you talked about Caleb we have such a such less difficulty identifying them in other people. If usually if you see extreme grief in other people or an extreme sense of nostalgia, it's it's much easier if I'm looking at somebody else who's um you know, missing for reminiscing about when they were younger or something like this and you say, "Oh, well, you know, there's a kind of sadness in that, but it's normal to get older and you probably shouldn't um stress about it too much because there's nothing you can do about it. It's happened to every other person that's ever existed." It's very easy for us to say that to other people, but we kind of struggle to do it for ourselves often, or at least I find I do. >> Absolutely. And it brings to mind the practice of premeditatio mealorum, you know, imagining that you've lost something and then realizing that you haven't lost it and sort of seeing seeing things with fresh eyes. I suppose you're trying to reframe the possibility of loss in a way that sort of reveals that what you have is fortunate. You know, we think about change that ultimately have to has to do with the whims of fortune >> and you know, we we focus on loss but spend less time thinking about >> the things we uh take for granted. I suppose it it sounds cliche but I do think this framing is useful to think about instead of you know the possibility of loss or shifting things to thinking about what you have what you had what you'll get as a matter of fortune because it is out of one's control and there's a kind of I suppose gratitude in that >> it is um a bit cliche but it's the it is the idea of if you take for granted what happened then You're you you you assume that as a baseline and you feel like you're being deprived of it instead of this kind of gratefulness and you said the premeditatium malorum imbus in us that kind of gratefulness man I I'm I'm not owed this opportunity you know this is not a [snorts] default for someone like me to have these things um many people don't have these things and so I'm grateful I get that chance it's a big mindset shift >> I think so I think it's also connected to if you think about the strategy Y, you know, emphasize your connection with nature and change is a part of nature. I think that points to the um idea that change is harder to handle when it arrives as a surprise. And the stoics especially Marcus Aurelius you know he notes that in a way it's foolish to be surprised by the sorts of things that happen because when you step back you know you knew you know it's it was a possibility but for whatever reason I think the changes that probably hit us hardest are things we assumed would never change right they're just assumptions we make and then something sneaks up on us and we realize that that was a mistake I shouldn't have assumed you know that I'd always be able to do this or uh you know that this the world was so just so engineered in my favor that you know this deal would never fall through and so on. [snorts] >> Yeah, I think that's I mean that goes right into the second strategy this idea as as you put it of of um you know trying to not be surprised by these things. And so the second strategy I have is expanding your conception of time so that you view change as a constant. And so the the argument here is that change is only disruptive because it's surprising as you said and it's surprising because we focus on a very small part of time. I mean there's many reasons it can be surprising. We we think we're owed things or we haven't thought about the possibilities. But Marcus's point is like look if you if you you know you many of these things won't be a surprise if you think about it in a large enough time frame. So if you expand our conception of time then change just becomes another constant. It becomes a thing to accept not something that won't surprise us. So I have two quotes here. One is from meditations 9.32 and Marcus says you can get rid of many superfluous troubles that depend entirely on your beliefs. That's the point you were raising earlier, Caleb, about um this this idea that we suffer because of what we think. And you'll immediately provide yourself with plenty of mental space. Encompass the whole universe with your mind. Contemplate the everlastingness of time and consider the speed with which individual things change. How short the time is between birth and disintegration. How vast the time before your birth and how similarly infinite the time after your disintegration. [snorts] Maybe you need to be a bit more of an of a uh advanced stoic to find that one immediately reassuring. Um but the point is we have a lot of these troubles. a lot of these things are stressing us. If we if we contemplate the the speed of change, the everlastingness of things, um it actually can help resolve some of those, we can put the changes in in the proper space or put them in the proper frame of mind. Another quote here is meditations 9.28. Marcus says, "Soon Earth will cover us all and then Earth too will change and an endless sequence of changes will take place. First the changing of the earth and then the changing of what the earth changed into and so on at infinitum. If one bears in mind these successive waves of changes and alteration and their speed, one will come to see everything that is mortal as contemptable. Um, again, an intense an intense ending there, um, about seeing you this this kind of but it's it's it's almost this rejection of these the pettiness of the troubles we have, I guess, is the way that I would put it. The almost the oh my god, I can't believe people are stressed about what am I going to do Thursday night? You know, what if what does this person think of me? Um, what am I going to what am I going to wear to this event? Well, if we if you can actually imagine the six billion years the earth has been around, the billion years that um it will last after we're gone and we kind of have this large time frame in mind and all of the changes and what a small blip we are within that. I I I think that when you I mean it is this adopting this cosmic perspective, it is in some way a kind of modification of the view from above. But I just think that when we when we look at the world like that, how small many of the changes we experience seem when put in the context of our entire life, let alone, you know, the entire history of the universe or the entire history of the planet. Um, what do you think? Yeah, I think Marcus Aurelius's most pathy statement of this perhaps is the universe's transformation, life is opinion, which is one of my favorite lines of his and it uh cements you know this view that everything is impermanent, everything's changing you the world is in flux. It's not a static thing and a part of you know if you think about the stoic project as pursuing knowledge something one is aiming to know and sort of in a deep sense you know feel it in your bones type sense is that this is the structure of reality constant change so very very in line with I think uh western accounts of Buddhism in that in that sense and probably Buddhism proper as well. [snorts] Yeah, I um I mean in many ways these are all just going to be different strategies of the part that you said the first, right? Uh as you said at the start, which is we're thinking about things the wrong way. Stoicism was providing these kind of cognitive strategies for thinking about things differently so that change is less upsetting. Um, and I think the in the insight here is as you said both in Buddha is in Buddhism as well less of an emphasis on or just placing less importance on kind of the day-to-day events keeping things in in a larger framework is really really helpful. um not trying to there's that there's that big stream in in Epictitus of you know don't complain about things that are inevitable. Marcus Aurelia says don't let a don't be surprised when a fig tree produces figs. That's one of my favorite pathy lines of his um to go along with yours. And this is the same kind of thing which is like the universe is this as you said it's um it's change life is opinion. If you recognize that, you're not going to be surprised by these moments. You're going to have them in mind. You're going to be prepared for them. Um, and just giving us that kind of um, perspective that lets us pull ourselves out of our moments of stress or moments of anxiety that often comes from us trying to control things we can't control or rigidity in our beliefs um, about how things should be. >> Um, yeah. >> Yeah. I suppose at the practical level, I find thinking about things from the cosmic perspective is perhaps most useful during moments of crisis. You know, it's a way to get a breather, get perspective quickly. Um but in terms of building up a habit you know where you can inhabit this perspective of you know seeing uh almost seeing the world from a larger standpoint. It's I think it's difficult to do. It's it's hard to ingrain that in a way where you um you know you aren't shocked by change just because that perspective is so different from our everyday experience. So I I do wonder I'm curious about your own case as well, but in my own case, I think I found it useful almost to try widen the scope of time in a smaller way. Uh that that feels less difficult to me and perhaps is a um easier way to build up a habit where you're thinking about things, you know, not in terms of millennia, but >> yeah, >> in a terms of, you know, this is my focus for the month, this is my focus for the year, this is the stage of life that I'm in. And that's, you know, that's this is what it's important now. Um, and, uh, having a framework that's at least, you know, you're still looking at things that are in a from a perspective that's larger from the, you know, the moment to moment. And that can help guide action and keep you rooted in a way. But it's it's not as perhaps difficult to uh find that space as it is to you jump immediately into the cosmic perspective and stay there for uh >> Yeah. You don't you don't daily think about the infinite time after your disintegration. That's not part of your [laughter] daily routine. >> Well, I do, but it just doesn't stick with me. You know, I forget it. That's the issue, I think. >> Ah, yeah. Yeah. Um, so the point here is that when we can play around with time, we've got a lot of different time spans to play with. And there's this kind of question, you know, will it matter? I sometimes find myself asking that question. Will it matter in 3 days, 3 weeks, 3 years? And kind of having that um that is something that's that's really helpful and really quick for me as well. Um there's also I I I think the point that maybe you were hitting on a bit if I was understanding you correctly of like you know this is this sort of period of my life maybe I'm in midlife now where I was a teenager before I was young man before [snorts] and those kind of periods of time have certain things that you should expect of them and try to make the most of and then there's also kind of a recognition that those periods of time will change and so instead of thinking about the entire universe you're thinking of Maybe, you know, I'm in university. I should enjoy partying. I should enjoy spending time with my friends, not working a full-time job quite yet, but also be okay when I graduate. Be prepared for that to change and like see what that is when I'm in it and like recognize basically basically having enough mindfulness to say this is a 4-year period of time, x number year period of time that I should enjoy, make the most out of, but not try to hold on to or linger around too long. Um, you know, this is a bit different from Marcus the quotes we were Marcus was bringing up, but maybe a similar kind of strategy of, you know, having a good conception of time is is a helpful way of dealing with change. Comes back to that point before, but it's just not surprising because you don't want to be that kind of person who, you know, let's say use the university example, you graduate and you haven't given any thought about that upcoming change. You haven't given any thought to the fact that you're entering a new life stage and it kind of really hits you off guard. Um, is that similar to kind of the strategy you were talking about or a bit different? >> Yeah, I think that's similar. It's definitely similar. I suppose the problem is or the problem that I was I was thinking about is um you know how can you create effectively the habit where you're not surprised by change and uh one way to do it is regularly meditate from this constant perspective whether that's you know pure contemplation or spending time in nature consuming art that expands one's sense of of time and I do think that that can work but at least you know you're trying to come up with a solution that impacts you dayto-day such that when a change occurs that's striking you're able to face it and I suppose you know the uh it's it just seems strikes me as a difficult place to inhabit this cosmic perspective right away. So maybe an an easier thing to do is thinking about taking the habit of when something arises stepping into a large you know being being comfortable stepping into a larger perspective of time but that's not necessarily the cosmic one but even the level of a lifespan or as you say a life stage. Yeah, I I would agree with that. When we make this kind of distinction between preventative exercises or I have in my research before written about preventative ex exercises, so these kinds of things that prepare us, make us stronger, um we're more prepared for adversity, and then almost like therapeutic exercises, things that help us in these moments of crisis. [clears throat] >> So maybe we think of that cosmic perspective as a therapeutic exercise like I'm I'm in this moment of grief. What are some cognitive tools I have to snap myself out of it? And one is is like a sustained intentional meditation on this cogic perspective. [snorts] And then there's there's in terms of a more preventative exercise, maybe it's just thinking about your life in terms of stages, thinking about your life in terms of uh you know, as you said, a lifetime of um and accepting the you know, accepting the fact that that your life at 20 is not going to look look like your life at 40. You might have different friends. You know, some people you care about might have passed. kind of recognizing these these rhythm or steps to human life more generally. But what what both share in common is expanding this time frame outside of just the day-to-day because when we're in the day-to-day, we're trying to control things. We're trying to determine the outcomes uh of our day and we we maybe get surprised by the variability or the things that come up outside of our control in that process. >> Yeah, absolutely. That's well seated. Cool. So another one is strategy three. So number one is that idea of emphasizing your connection with nature. See like it's change is this natural thing. I'm not owed anything. If something's taken from me, I've given it. If I lose something, it's been given back. It's rejoined. It's part of nature. It's not um you know, it wasn't taken from me because it never belonged with me to begin with. Strategy two is expanding that conception of time. Change is a constant when you when you give enough of a you have a broad enough perspective um and you can reflect on that consistency of change. And strategy three I I I'll call it emphasizing the agency however small you do have to influence this change. So even though the world is changing, it's an incredible thing that we get to play our part. Um, we get to do what nature is currently demanding of us. In Marcus Relius's words, we still have a degree of agency. If we focus on this, we can find meaning even in a changing world because we're contributing to that change. We're participating in that change. We are um, you know, providing our own input to the future state. And often in often in stoicism we talk about, you know, there's these things that are entirely up to us and there are these things that are not up to us. But that is that's not to say there aren't things that we influence. The Stoics, they they think they're not up to us because we don't determine them. But there's this entire category of things we influence, determine, have an effect upon. And sometimes we can lose if we just focus on the things that are up to us. just my choices, forget the outcomes, just my beliefs, forget, you know, how I h how my actions influence the world. We can lose some of the meaning that comes from, yeah, actually contributing to things and changing things. So, um, a quote here from Marcus Aurelius 9.31. This is the same. This is all from book nine. So, he was feeling very, very reflective when writing book nine. Uh, Marcus says, "The universal cause is a torrent. It carries everything with it." So my friend, what to do? Just do what nature is currently demanding of you. If you have the opportunity, go ahead straight away without letting your attention be distracted by wondering whether anyone will know what you're doing. Don't expect to create Plato's ideal state, but be satisfied if you make even the slightest progress and regard that in itself as no small achievement. So when he talks about the universal cause, he basically means fate. You know, the unfolding of of reality, fate, time, it's it's chugging along, it's pushing, it's it's unfolding. It carries everything with it. So what do you do? Well, recognize what nature is demanding of you and try to play your part. Well, he says, don't create Plato's ideal state. And you know, he's the emperor. He's he's referencing explicitly the philosopher kings from Plato's Republic. He's saying, you know, I I I don't have to like attach myself to this ideal, to being the perfect um perfect parent, perfect friend, perfect at my job. I can just in the moment make a little bit of progress, make a little bit of change, do a little bit of a good thing. And if I do that, don't don't think of that as no small achievement. respect and appreciate what I've done in that moment. So I I think that's uh I think that's about emphasizing emphasizing your agency saying I have this capacity life is change universe is change but I have a capacity to influence it if I can especially if I can recognize you know what what I'm well suited to do what I have the ability to do well and I can act on that and there's uh there's meaning in that even though you know I'm not I'm not um God like I don't control everything. I can't do things that are impossible but I can do some things and that there there's something meaningful about that again if we if we really think about it and keep it in our in our minds. Yeah, I've thought of one p one um framework that I really like and that I got from the French philosopher Pierre Hado is this idea that the sage is able to combine the perspectives of the whole and the part. And I think that is what this speaks to. they're able to sort of inhabit this cosmic perspective that the other two strategies touched on this larger perspective, but at the same time they don't lose sight of what's in front of them, the task at hand. And uh I think that's a that's a beautiful picture and perhaps a target as well. And you don't want to you don't want to become do too detached by zooming to these larger perspectives. At the same time, you don't want to become too attached to the here and now. So that's a matter of almost combining this uh this framework of uh seeing things uh from the level of where you are uh while also being aware of the the larger picture. And both of those are essential. You know, both of those have meaning. Both of those sort of tell, you know, the story of your life on one hand, story of our lives uh on the other. >> I love that. I love that idea of comb. I probably read that before if it was in uh is it in the inner citadel? >> Yeah, it's something he talks about in a number of different places, but >> the uh in the inner citadel for sure. >> Yeah, I guess I'm just at a point where that resonates with me more now. Um it's so hard to do and it's this capacity because we often think about switching between the two. I mean, you even gave that example of, you know, I can't go around and think about the infinity of time after my disintegration [laughter] and then go, you know, and go to the post office and wait in line. Like, there's this kind of tension. So, you you you can you can apply that or you can be in the moment and be like, "Ah, I'm so stressed because I got to make it to this appointment on time." And you're like fully inhabiting your role, your perspective as an individual, your kind of day-to-day objectives. What a difficult task to balance both of those simultaneously and kind of keep both of those in mind. You got in in perspective the universal cause. Again, that's a interesting translation, but probably just some sort of version of fate or providence or um you know reason, logos, it's unfolding. It's happening. I'm keeping that in mind, but I'm also asking what does that mean for me? you know what's the another analogy what's the plot of the play but at the same time what's my role in it and how can I play that role well as Epictitus would say um not an easy thing to do I find a lot of philosophies try to do one or the other or at least that's maybe my shallow reading of Buddhism is you're trying to kind of disintegrate the perspective of the part um >> so interesting task of stoicism to m maintain both simultaneously Yeah, there's a there's an example from a philosopher named Eric Wenberg. I think it's in his book, Value and Virtue in a Godless Universe. uh perhaps virtue and value in a godless universe where he talks about being at a high school basketball game or something like this and just going wild in the stands with his friends and just living being in the moment and then some teacher comes over and says something like you guys won't care about this in a couple of years and he's like you know that teacher just sort of missed missed the point in a way where you know they're you know that for that point in time it was to to truly sort being uh I don't know play the role of a high schooler at that at that moment to it absolutely made sense to go wild in his stands you know have fun with his friends and so on it doesn't you know not not a matter that you need to pour a bucket of cold water on and such and you know at the same time you don't want to be the kind of person who's always reminiscing you know those days with with my buddies and uh you know that that was the time and now you know now now everything's uh perhaps you know your life didn't turn out the way you want to hold on to that that kind of image in the past. Um and uh you know I think you want to be able to the per to be able be that person who celebrates in the moment and then moves on to celebrate in the next next moments whatever whatever that happens to be. >> Yeah, I think that's exactly it. I think if I think of the ideal stoic, it's exactly that picture. It's the person that is really happy at their high school basketball game or like really enthusiastic because they care uh but isn't you said isn't reminiscing and then they they care when they're a young adult and or when they're a parent and they also accept that their kids move away as they go into older age because that's what that life that's what that stage of life demands. It's a kind of im that's that idea of thinking of change as a constant is that it when you think of it as a constant not this this thing that's being deprived of you. It's like well I had some opportunities now in this role things will change and I'll have some opportunities then and I'll have some different roles to play. I'll have some different things that nature is demanding of me as Marcus is putting it and I can like live [snorts] I can I can genuinely care about those things and also be prepared for them to go away. Um well and like what a state that would be to achieve. I [clears throat] mean sometimes I get close to that, sometimes I'm further from that but um that to me is the stoic ideal. That would be great. >> Yeah. Some things I something I've been thinking about recently is it seems like it's really those transitional moments that are difficult. You know, I've noticed both of us do martial arts and I've noticed people as they get older, you know, you deal with injuries and there are some people who don't, you know, maybe they're in their 50s or 60s don't want to let go of that role of themselves as an athlete. You know, I think typically these were people who were uh, you know, very successful, very fit, but they've stacked up too many injuries that, you know, they're in that transitional period where they probably need to find that next stage of life. And I' I've used to think, you know, the people who go hard even when they're older and end up hurting themselves, I used to think that was silly. But now I maybe I know myself more and I think that's a very real possibility for me. [laughter] also you know how how am I going to handle you know these sorts of situations that sort of transitional period where you know I can't do what I used to be able to do and thinking about thinking about that moving between you know different stages physically just a simple example I've been thinking about just because of uh I guess personal personal events in my life seeing others >> yeah but I guess it is just like grief and loss um going a bit away from these quotes we gave I mean grief can mean a lot of different things but it's kind of I used to be this young successful athlete and now I'm this old man and instead of becoming this mentor or a coach or you know kind of person who who steps away from the sport because I only wanted to be an athlete and you can only be an athlete in your young years. I'm stuck in this kind of in between stage as you said which is kind of a tragic figure. think about that, you know, the person who talks about their high school football career and there's there's a kind of tragedy to this um if you make it a too substantial a part of your identity um because you're not able to move on or transition. I think about a lot about what Martha Nusbomb wrote in upheavalss of thought. She talked about the loss of her own mother and does it did it through this kind of cognitive stoic perspective and this idea is you know she lost her mother and she feels like she's going to die like her world is ending this is the worst thing that's ever happened to her and then there becomes a transition as you said there's a transition moment and she can either hold on to that and stay in that mode for the rest of her life and the grief will maintain because she's maintained the same beliefs or she can transition which becomes oh my mother's this amazing person. >> Mhm. >> I was so lucky to get to know her, but I don't need her or to have her in my life, but I don't need her in my life to continue to live well. There looks like a version of my life that is well-lived without this person. And so, she hasn't kind of she hasn't changed the belief that her mother matters or her mother was a great person or she loved her mother. She instead changed the belief which is like I need to be I need to be able to see my mother to live a good life or I need to be able to have a relationship with my mother to have a good life. It's [snorts] quite it's quite a heavy example but I I think it illustrates the point of like you know you can say oh it was a great thing that I was a good athlete but I then I can when the transition is well I can still think it was a good thing to be a great athlete that was a thing worth doing it was a thing I enjoyed doing but I don't need to be a great athlete now to have a good life a good life can look like something different and in fact >> you know there's some facts about reality that mean I probably shouldn't try to be a good athlete now it's probably an ill fit and I'm kind of ignoring how my life is changing. >> Yeah, I think that that's really useful. I think it it and it connects to Marcus Aurelius's line, you know, just do what nature is currently demanding of you. At least that's what I'm I'm thinking of now where perhaps you're stuck on a previous demand and >> yeah, >> the grief case is hard. If you think about, you know, the case of you changing your physical capabilities, at some point you move to become more of a mentor, become more of a coach. And uh if you're able to to make that transition, then you found a new demand, a new role that you can fulfill. And it's it's perhaps those people who, you know, may either don't want to or uh for whatever reason perhaps feel unable to to to move like that, shift their identity, shift their role that that really struggle with these kinds of changes. >> Yeah. Yeah, I mean another example is um in terms of parents um you know the role that you will take as a parent shifts even from young age to teenagers to young adults. And where do you get in these fights? You get in these fights because it's like you're trying to treat your teenager like they're 12 or you're trying to teach your adult child like they're a teenager. um still and that that that there that kind of as you just said I think it's just another example of what the role demands of you shifts over time because you can think of the athlete role as you know your role is to contribute to the art participate in the sport but what that looks like at 25 is different than what that looks like at 55. >> Yeah, absolutely. >> Cool. So that was I mean that was really helpful for me. Um, we looked at three strategies. We talked about emphasizing your connection with nature and that's really this idea of, you know, [snorts] I I'm part of this bigger thing and as part of this bigger thing, you know, I I have this opportunity to have relationships or have a piece of a job or piece of land. But you know to use the equities example I don't know how people are maybe some people were prideful of their of their farms here but but maybe their property in in some capacity but you know if that changes well then that was never owed to me that was never didn't belong to me again it was a part of nature which I'm also a part of. Second idea we talked about a lot about was expanding your conception of time. We there's there's different time frames, different ways to do that. You do this kind of cosmic perspective, the infinity [snorts] of time, how how we are just a blip in it and like our entire life is just a small little blip of change. Or you can even just go kind of phase by phase of I need to keep in mind this is one phase of my life and that that phase will change um because what's expected to me of me changes over a lifetime. And then the third strategy though those are kind of preventative. Third strategy that is more positive provides more meaning is to say well change is this opportunity to enact your agency. You have an ability to participate in that change to make something of that change. And that line I'll take away from that is this idea of just do what nature is currently demanding of you. um there in in any moment, you know, when you're the young athlete, there's the there's these opportunities that are available to you and unique to you. But now when you're this older maybe an older individual now maybe you have different opportunities available to you to mentor, to coach, to give back to the community um to to you know help other people who are in in their prime or some people choose to compete in kind of you know mast's competitions as well and things like that. But like be honest about your current stage. Be aware of what nature is providing uh demanding of you, your current role and then exert your agency in that lane. And that's kind of a meaningful way to engage with change. The other idea I'll think of coming from this conversation, Caleb, was that idea of the part and the whole maintaining both those perspectives. We we we need to maintain this perspective of the part to give our life meaning. We need to be able to cheer at the basketball game. And I need to be able to maintain this perspective of the whole to navigate when those parts change. When you go from being the student at the high school student at the basketball game to well now you're working your first job. Um you you navigate that by keeping in mind this perspective of the whole. That'll be a big takeaway for me as well. Um that's my that's my summary. Any any other thoughts you had? >> Yeah, well summarized. I hope these strategies are useful uh for others. I think I found personally I found you know the practice of shifting perspective focusing on different time spans exceptionally useful and uh I think something that I'm I'm thinking about as a result of this conversation is something that can help manage change I think is is at once being able to take a larger perspective but also looking at you know what does nature demand of me now and finding that >> you know looking at things realistically and and I think finding that as a source of meaning too is uh also a good strategy. >> Yeah, totally agree. Awesome. Thanks, Gil. >> Cool. Thanks, Michael. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found [music] this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use, and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com and please get in touch with us at Stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
