---
title: "Eclecticism with Anya Leonard from Classical Wisdom (Episode 206)"
slug: eclecticism-with-anya-leonard-from-classical-wisdom
episode_number: 206
youtube_id: R9k5tflioL8
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R9k5tflioL8
upload_date: 2025-10-21
duration: 48:48
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Caleb Montiveros. Today I am speaking with Ana Leonard. Anya is the founder of classical wisdom uh which you can find at classicalwisdom.com. He's also on Substack and they have a wealth of articles and resources on ancient wisdom including stoicism but also uh much broader than that. Thanks so much for joining. >> Thank you so much for having me. It's a it's a pleasure to be speaking with you. >> Well, I thought we would discuss some philosophers philosophies that are related adjacent to stoicism and someone who you've been writing writing some pieces on recently. Heracletus perhaps a name some of listeners might be familiar with perhaps not but I think seeing the connections between his thought we know about his thought and stoicism can be very fruitful. So let's start from the top. You know, who was Heracitis and maybe even on the personal side, what sort of stands out about the man to you? >> Well, thank you again to sort of open up the conversation to some of the broader ancient philosophies. Um I usually like to say that uh stoicism is sort of like a gateway drug to other ancient philosophies. And it's very exciting sometimes when you start to learn about stoicism to find out that there's so much more uh interesting philosophy that can be impactful in one's life and and to see the influences these philosophies have had on stoicism and Heracitis is is one of those. I mean he has a very direct impact um both on the founder of ancient uh stoicism Zeno Cidium as well as as much more later Stoics. So for those who want a brief introduction to who Heracitis was, he lived uh you know around the 500 BC mark uh and he was in the city of Ephesus in what is modernday Turkey um in Asia Minor and at that time he was living it was actually under rule by the Persian Empire. And Heraclitus was a very um interesting fellow. Uh he was quite obscure in his writings and he was um very cryptic. Uh and he also was kind of famously a misanthropic. He he was sort of described as wandering the hills by himself uh just nourishing himself on the plants and uh he did write uh one work that we know of which he left at the temple of Artemis and um that is was referred to by a lot of other ancient philosophers. Uh sadly that text has been lost to us today but uh it was we have so many of his ideas and and concepts preserved through quotations and references from later philosophers and some of them got him some of them didn't. You know Aristotle complained about him. Socrates said and I love this quote. He says, "The part I understand is excellent, and so too, I dare say, the part I do not understand, but it needs a Delian diver to get to the bottom of it." Uh, so Heracitis kind of wrote these these very, yes, obscure quotes. Uh, and and one might recognize him today as one of those rare accomplishments of passing into the into modern parlance with you cannot step in the same river twice. uh and and the one that the one of the best quotes for that one is on those who step into the same rivers different and different waters flow. So this kind of concept of of change being being very fundamental to who heracitis was. >> Yeah, absolutely. I think um you can see that thinking of change in particular you can see that uh in remarks by Marcus Aurelius like the universe is transformation life is opinion I think he has a number of lines that hearken back to Heracles's view of the world perhaps as as flux as it's often captured. I know there's some perhaps complications around to what extent that is accurate or might be overplayed, but I think that's um one way in which Heraclitus influence stoic metaphysics is this this idea of change. >> Yes, certainly. So I mean Heraclitus really felt that the the cosmos was in a constant state of flux and and that flux is everything's changing but it's not only changing, it's becoming its opposite. And this kind of concept to us we can relate to in a very real and anecdotal manner when we think you know your hot tea becomes cold uh life becomes death the seasons are constantly changing I mean it's something very real and tangible that we experience and not only is that change constant externally that change can even be constant internally like we our opinions change depending on where we are in our lives and everything but but this chaos and and at times tension, you know, because he said king is is sorry, war is the king of all because it it makes some men kings and some men slaves. And he also said strife is justice. And and to our sort of modern minds, we would think, oh, no, no, we we we're kind of more conflict averse. Like we why would this be a a good thing? Uh but it is through these tensions that order and harmony are found. and he uses a couple of examples for that. Um, specifically the liar, the ancient sort of harp and showing that the tension of the strings is where the music comes from. And similarly uh the the bow and arrow, the bow uh only works because of this of this tension. And Heracitis just for those who are sort of interested in in the language of his writing, he makes so many basically puns and word plays. So in each fragment he has it they're beautiful to hear in the ancient Greek but they also work on so many on so many layers um with regards to like the word for arrow also being the word for life I mean bow and life. So he is he's somebody that a few fragments you can spend a lifetime contemplating. But where it relates to stoicism more specifically is that this flux, this change, this tension kind of results in something that he thought called the logos, which is sort of this rational ordinary ordining principle in the world. Um, and this is definitely something that the Stoics sort of adopted wholesale. they they saw the you know the universe as a single living rational organism that was permeated by by divine reason this logos um and so this is definitely something uh that the stoics felt Heraclitus really got right like a metaphysical understanding that nature is dynamic but ordered and what happens and what follows is sort of reason and necessity. So this kind of aspect that the world kind of makes sense even if we don't know how. >> Yeah. How how does that make sense? It's I think perhaps the first pass you might understand Ericus is saying you know change is constant. Everything is changed in a fundamental way. You you can't step into the same river twice. You know what was scattered gathers. What was gathered blows apart is one of uh my favorite fragments of his. And yet he still believes things are ordered in a fundamental way at least at least uh with this account of the logos. Yeah. How how do you make sense of that? Well, I mean, it's it's something that actually follows with a more scientific understanding of how nature works. And I think has been he's been vindicated in this in a lot that like you might look at a forest and just see something that looks completely irrational and unreasoned like just a natural forest and there's leaves everywhere and there's trees and you know, you just it hasn't been made into a garden. It's it's just nature as it is. But if you look into it, you know, you'll see leaves growing out with the Fibonacci sequence or you'll see that these cycles go and exist. So it's actually like the theory of natural natural order that we can find governing laws underneath this chaos. um that you know it's the the spiral in the galaxy, the spiral in our our DNA that these patterns and shapes and kind of universal truths exist even if we don't know them at that time. And when you think about a lot of the original ancient philosophies, they were very they their world was not so siloed as ours is today. you know, we like to put math over here and philosophy over here and biology over here and and keep them really separate as distinct categories. But for the original philosophers, um, they were scientists as well and mathematicians as well. And you know, I think it was over the Plato's academy that said no man who doesn't know geometry enter here. that uh that these were sort of natural scientists and so they're trying to make sense of their world and philosophy and understanding and perceiving the world were very much part of that. So it it does it does have sort of a a logic to it. I mean where of course the word like logos comes from as well that we're of trying to understand the world even when we perceive it as chaos. >> Yeah. But perhaps an order emerges from chaos. Perhaps you can think of as emergent order might be one class on it >> that uh and and and it's amazing with emergent qualities. There's so many times that we see it and don't understand it. And I think anyone who's spent a lot of time seeing a child grow up will see this where you know they're speaking at first and it's just little babbling sounds and the sounds start to make more shape and then and then all of a sudden the language like becomes clear. And when we learn modern or any language as adults, we we think of it like first we have to learn one word after another and we have to build grammar and we have to like approach it in this sort of rational way. But actually when you see language appear naturally, it just sort of comes up just like teeth come down. It's it's it's sort of all at once in a way that um is all inspiring personally, but we don't always see it until it it happens. Yeah, I think so. That's something that's uh I suppose an important theme is that we don't always see the order or don't understand how things are ordered and as such perhaps make mistaken judgments about about the world. I think um that also that reminds me of uh Marcus Reese's remarks about the uh you know flexcks of foam on a boar's mouth or the cracks in a loaf of bread and about if you saw how these things fit together into the larger hole these parts fit together in a larger hole then you would understand the beauty of of these kind these kinds of uh phenomena. Well, and there's that very popular parable with uh if you had, you know, several blind men touching an elephant and uh different parts of the elephant, they would have no idea what they were looking at. I mean, if you're just touching a tusk, you would think it was a very different animal than if you were touching the tail or the legs. And they can't see the full animal. They can only see the little small part they have. Uh and that's, I think, a really good analogy for or metaphor for how a lot of us experience the world. like we we only see the part that we see. We we don't necessarily see how it fits into a larger hole, nor necessarily can we, but that's maybe that's to the Stoics versus the skeptics. I should save that for later. >> Very good. Well, one other question I had about Heracle's picture of the world, I suppose, is so the Stoics, they see the world's fundamentally ordered and it has a kind of providence purpose to it. Would you say Heracitis is similar in that regard or >> um I don't know as much with the providence or even fate. I think um it's it's a it's less complete. I mean the other thing just to say again we we don't have as much of a full picture of what Heraclitus felt then as we do with stoicism. So there will be elements uh where we just we have gaps because there's so few of his of his ideas that are extent tragically today. So um it's and a lot of what we have as I was saying are fragments and even of those fragments a lot of them are hard to really fully understand what he was saying and and as a sort of funny um concept is that even in the ancient world even when his works were fully available you know before the library of exal Alexandria burned down um there was philosophers who would say yes heracitis it's sort of like reading it's like really brilliant and then it feels like he's just not he didn't finish it. He just sort of mumbles the second half. So, uh but I I I like to give Heraclitus, you know, the the benefit of the doubt. And I like to think that uh he really wanted to make people work for it to understand >> these ideas. And he didn't write just for everybody. He really wanted people to to earn the the wisdom uh and and to put in the effort to get there. And I use sometimes like a modern example of that is if you've read Faulner's The Sound and the Fury or Nebulov's Ada or Adore I mean the first 50 pages of it are near impossible to get through and he's weeding everybody out purposefully. Um, so I think Heracitis was similar in that regard where he he it was a fine line between poetry and philosophy. I mean, well, I shouldn't say there was a line at all. They're completely intertwined with his works. So, you you do have to figure it out a little bit. And there's lots of debate still. >> Yeah, I think so. I think there's both a aspect where we only have fragments of Heracitis's work and then as you say perhaps even if we had the complete picture there's a cryptic poetic nature to his uh his thought that engenders controversy and also I think um is uh is is rich I think something worth worth thinking over for a lifetime or two as you said >> and one thing I think that is very strikingly similar to Heracitis and the stoics is to see that tension and strife as a pathway you know so it as I was saying before this sort of tension creates harmony it's supposed to be difficult because it will make it more meaningful that that these challenges are purposeful and and necessary at times so I I definitely think that is an element where they they have a very large crossover >> I think So related to that I suppose how do you make sense of some of these fragments like justice in our mind is strife we cannot help but see war makes us as we are how how do you make sense of those >> so there's a few things to this in the time period in which Heracitis was living I mean he would have seen a lot of war um he had seen Darius take over uh the Persian Empire sort of roll through this uh this Greek colony and his life would have had constant war. So for him war was a reality. It was not something that we fortunately nowadays think okay I mean it's still extremely tragic but it can happen we can live our whole lives without being in a war. You're can have your parents live a whole life without being a war. that was just not a possibility for Heracitis. So war and strife were were inevitable. And so instead of it just seeing the destruction of it, it is what comes afterwards. And so in some ways, you know, when empires come through, they they create these orders that did not exist beforehand. You know, something that the Romans would have felt uh as well. But so this is this element of strife is very very real. But I sort of hinted before too at the idea that in some ways he is the origins of relativism in that our perception changes as well. And this is another one that anecdotally we can relate to. Whereas, for instance, a cold glass of water when you're really hot um means a lot more to you. Feeling well after being sick, you value it more. So for him, he does bring up a lot of these ideas that our experience of um change is also internal as well as external. So strife is part of war, but it's also in our own lives. How much more do we appreciate our friends or families if we've had conflict? And conflict is necessary. And another way that I think just to I mean one thing I always try to do at classical wisdom is to take these ideas and put them sort of firmly in the modern world and realm so that they're very relatable and we understand how they work. And I think in a way to see this importance of strife in conflict is to see the history of philosophy or science itself. you know, everybody has an idea and then they have to have a contrasting idea. And these theories, you know, the entire process, scientific process is that of critique, um, conflict. You think of there's there's so many examples. And same thing with philosophy. You know, Socrates had his ideas. Plato contrasted or rejected some of them. Then Aristotle rejected Plato. And we kind of go back and forth until we we create something. Art too is a history of conflict uh and creation. Conflict and creation. So this idea of strife is more important to us than we might originally think. >> Yeah, I think so. That's a great point. It's um perhaps uh most of us avoid strife, conflict whenever we can, but it's a necessity to ordinary life and certainly is perhaps hidden behind many of our normal interactions. You know, just always just below the surface or, you know, the possibility of more serious conflict makes make society what it is. I think it's also worthwhile for us to sometimes take a step back at the words that we have translated today and see them and their modern connotations. I think strife sounds very negative to us whereas debate or contention at times would be more applicable. And you think about the founding of the United States of America uh is very much a huge series of debates and arguments between you know should the government be large or small should we have the central bank or not I mean anybody who's watched Hamilton will remember this if not have read the history books. So these series of of debates and conflicts are absolutely fundamental rather than just being a fight. Now it is interesting because in the ancient Greek strife relates directly to Aerys who is uh the goddess of kind of chaos who is the the true originator of the entire Trojan War. uh when she throws a golden apple into a wedding and causes a fight between Hera and Aphrodite um and Athena. So, it's it's kind of it's funny to think that in their world there's there's even a goddess to embody this sort of originator of what it what goes on to become the greatest epic in their mythology. >> Yeah, absolutely. And um I suppose before we think about some other philosophies, philosophers, are there any particular fragments that you that stand out to you from Heracitis that you find exceptionally either beautiful or provocative? Well, one that I think your your listeners will like the most comes from is fragment uh I think it's 116 is to be sound minded the greatest excellence and wisdom to say and do true things giving heed according to nature and I can definitely see a nice stoic overlap uh with one living according to nature and that going back to logos and and seeing that nature but also that to be soundminded in wisdom is also rooted in virtue and doing good things and being excellent. So, um that's the Eva Braun translation. I'm big Eva Braun fan, so I thought I'd go with that one. >> Oh, very nice. Yeah, it sounds like a stoic. You know, you've got the living accordance with the nature and this idea of knowledge perhaps grounding what is uh most virtuous. uh you mentioned um the division between the stoics and the skeptics and I think perhaps that ties nicely to some of what we've been talking about with Heracitis where Heracitis you have uh this the chaos flux and so on that can be understood both in the I suppose the fancy philosophical world word is metaphysics the level of you know this is the way things are they truly are chaotic but also the level of what we believe epistemology um and such we we see things uh as in constant constant flux and it it shapes our our beliefs and I think perhaps this of course the stoics and the skeptics have different responses to the uncertainty that this engenders. So I wonder if you if you could speak to uh the skeptics and the conflict between them and the the stoics. >> Yeah, it's it's interesting. I was I was saying to you before we started that you know with classical wisdom one of the things we try to do is encapsulate the full broad range of the classical world which is quite massive. I mean it seems like it's going to be niche but we kind of cover Hrien's wall down to North Africa across India from around 12,000 BC sometimes up to about 500 AD. And uh and I I love it because it can give a broad overview, but it does mean that there are definitely niches that are so uh precise. And I find the stoicis the stoic movement and stoicism absolutely fascinating and I've I've been loving its u renaissance culturally and I think it's absolutely fantastic. But there are definitely going to be elements of stoicism that your listeners will be more knowledgeable than me if if that's the specific interest. Uh whereas I will say I'm a big fan of skepticism. So perhaps uh in this one well no I'm not going to I'm not going to put out my position yet because I I I'm going to conclude elsewhere. So the skeptics like stoicism, like skepticism, like cynicism and like epicurionism, the word of the philosophy has a very different connotation in meaning today. And I love that I think stoicism has been able to recapture that word away from the sort of very narrow cultural perception that it used to have. And skepticism still has some some leg work to do on this. So, you know, your modern person is probably going to think skeptics. They just maybe like they're the crazy people who only watch, you know, the History Channel after midnight and nothing is real and who built the pyramids and things like that. Which, you know, there's a certain level of that. I'm like, yes, question everything. Great. But also, skepticism more philosophically is about how can we know what we know? Um, how can we can we trust our senses? Is what we see going to be how we determine knowledge or does it is it through just our mind and and this is a very important debate that you know goes straight up to Kant and the Capernican revolution. So it's it's a very critical question to study as you say epistemology how do we know what we know and the skeptics were they were pretty solidly on the category of we can't know what we know and and there's more extreme levels of it and the most extreme is we can never know what we know I mean and we can't know anything so th this this school of skepticism it kind of initiated with a writer a pharaoh who was writing in the 4th century BC and this became more of a philosophy much later on the 1st century BC but it it had mostly survived through the works of of Sexus and Pericus um around the 3rd century CD and um it's it's really at its heart a practice of suspending judgment and it's sort of just a series of understanding how we can accept that we can't really know much. And you can think of Socrates saying, "I do not claim to know that which I do not know." Like there's a level of skepticism that I think is absolutely essential for learning anything because it's going to be impossible to learn something if you think you know it. So accepting that we do not know that which we do not know is 100% I think the first step in kind of achieving wisdom. Um and the Stoics had uh an understanding of how how they can know and um and this is where I think maybe you might be more knowledgeable than me and this with regards to the process in which they felt that they knew which I believe was the was catalypsis and that was like a series of impressions that would that you had to choose what was right and what was wrong. Um and then afterwards there was like an ascent to which you could say I now understand this. And so the stoics certainly felt that it was achievable to know what is good and right and virtuous and the skeptics did not think that was possible. >> Right? I think there is a fundamental agreement between the two where they both have this idea that it's our judgments that cause so much suffering and then perhaps a slightly different different response to that fact. I think both of them both schools have the insight that our desires are frustrated and but often our desires depend on our beliefs our value judgments and uh we can either withhold if we suspend judgment often that's the best thing to do and one of the best ways to address address suffering but as as you say I think uh despite sharing what we might call today a sort of skeptical attitude towards our oppressions, appearances. The skeptics sort of take it all the way, whereas the Stoics want to say, "No, at the end of the day, some knowledge is is possible. We can know what's good, some facts about the world and so on." >> Well, what I like at the end is, you know, Epictitus, he respected the skeptics as as a as a very worthy opponent. He he saw them as a useful challenge. And I think that kind of to bring it sort of full circle to Heracitis is that you need sometimes challenge in order to refine your ideas. And if they're never challenged, then how do you know those ideas are good? I mean, how do you you need that conflict? And so Epictitus, you know, was very respectful of the skeptics in what they brought. And I think there was one thing that they were influentially positive for the Stoics was sort of an intellectual humility and that that's kind of critical to live by reason and evidence without presuming infallibility. So, um I I can see that as being very very useful. And I think to me there's there's if I may two quotes from Epictitus that actually one of these is my favorite quote of basically almost the entire ancient world that I just absolutely love. But the first one goes to to the problem of the of the skeptics which is if you suspend judgment on everything you will move neither toward nor away from anything but you will die of hunger and thirst. So um I I can see for for Epictitus specifically the issue with skepticism as a whole from the sort of philosophical position is it's a self-defeating position. You can't just say you know nothing and never will. Um, and so the conclusion, and I think this I like I like this one, is for what is the professed object of reasoning to state the true, to eliminate the false, and to suspend judgment in doubtful cases. And so I think the skepticism initially is to suspend judgment when you do not know. That is the important takeaway from skepticism that we need to be able to say we don't know. We need to question what we don't know or how we know things. But when we then learn and test that, then we can eventually come to what we believe is true and what is also false. >> Yeah, they're both in discourses but in different books. So, um, but I like that one is more so specifically to the skeptics, but the the second one, um, is sort of a a much better encapsulation, I think, of the Stoics how to to approach understanding while incorporating a little element of that skepticism. >> Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. I think the the um sort of practical advice that Betitus gives in different places does seem almost like initially skeptical advice. You know, just refrain from making mistakes. You know, you know, imagine putting a a guardian in front of every impression uh that occurs and don't let anything pass you that shouldn't and so on. And that can be a matter of just simply suspending judgment. I like it when sort of rooting it into our here and now to bring up the fact that uh we have a lot of really intense current events and political polarization and uh very heated discussions that happen a lot. And there's a lot of time an event happens and we're sort of encouraged to take a very strong stance on what has happened immediately right when it's happened. right before there's no way you could possibly know everything that you need to know. But at that moment, you're supposed to declare what side you're on, change your flag on social medias or or do whatever it is that like signify to the world that you're in this position with regards to whatever it is that has just happened or is the the topic dour that is very heated. Um, and it might be something as silly as, you know, some supermodel's jeans ads or or something as fundamental as as ongoing conflict. But I think the value of skepticism is to take a step back and before stating your position actually wondering how much you know on the topic because there's a lot of times we think we know a lot more than we do and that these these whatever the the issue is is much more complicated. So I think incorporating a bit of skepticism um h how do you what do you know and how do you know it is a is a great first question before committing oneself to a position. Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. I think that you're you're often there's some amount of social pressure to come to some judgment in response to some blurry video or something of this sort. Uh but often often that's unwarranted. And I think even in our own personal lives, we might have some initial reaction to some something someone did. Uh but you know, how much do you know about that actual situation is always a fruitful fruitful question. What what the person's intentions were uh and so on. Um, one exercise I love from the skeptics here is this uh equipence of opposites. I suppose a sort of exercise of if you think you have knowledge about some situation or if you have some belief that you're clinging to tightly, think of the opposite and hold those two in your mind. You know, both the affirmation and the denial. And often you'll you'll come to see that they have a kind of uh perhaps that forces you to move to a more agnostic position or to suspend judgment at least decrease one's confidence uh in the initial belief. >> And then again to go back to Heraclitus my man um it's also if you realize that any position anything that's happening is constantly changing and constantly becoming its opposite then how strong is that position if you know it's in a in a state of flux. >> Yeah, that's a I think that's a that's a deep point. There's you know if you think about I suppose knowledge our beliefs often so limited to a certain point of time and that might change and maybe you think oh now you can't change your mind but the world's very complicated and you know our beliefs probably ought to change quite a lot as as the world does. >> Correct. I would I would definitely agree with that. Um well I think uh another a fun place to go to thinking about um opposites these conflicts between different schools is Senica loves to talk about another school the Epicurans sometimes he mentions them so much Epicurus in particular so much in his letters that you wonder if it's a little bit of a giveaway to his stoic credentials but um I wonder if you could you could speak to um you know how you find the Epicurian as a as a philosophy what what you find most uh interesting or fruitful uh when you comes for a as it comes to a tradition where one can mine mine wisdom from >> well as I mentioned before with regards to you know stoic cynics all these these terms Epicurus is another one that really doesn't have to do with food blogging and yet is what we kind of think of these days uh so it's it is another phil uh ancient philosophy that was sort of based on the teachings of Epicurus and he's, you know, from around 340 BC on the island of Samos. And um the Epicurans, they were uh in some ways very like a lot of the prescratics with regards to being autonomists and materialists and he was very much influenced by democratists and they were very much against superstition and and divine intervention. So there were certain elements to it that um that that wouldn't really align with stoicism and that predominantly the the biggest conflict would be the idea of pleasure. Um and they kind of followed the tradition of hedenism a bit more in regards to holding happiness is pleasure is sort of the main goal rather than than virtue. So that's a a major conflict with the stoics. One thing that I think is very important to distinguish is that when we think of hedenism and by extension epicurionism, we think of pleasure without consequence. So we just imagine gluttony uh you know drinking for as much or or drugs or just absolute the the highest extent of this experience of seeking pleasure. But that was not the ancient philosophy. The ancient philosophy was much more calculated about seeing pleasure. So they would say, okay, you want to feel pleasure, but the second that pleasure will change into pain, you shouldn't do it anymore. So it's fine to drink a glass of wine and enjoy it. But if you have four bottles and you wake up the next day with a raging headache, that is no longer pleasure. That is pain. So that is against Epicurian philosophy. You're about finding that balance and it's very calculated in finding that balance. So, it's much more controlled and thoughtful than I think our preconceived notions about this philosophy is. And if you realize that, then you can see then how Senica and and other um more stoic leaning philosophers later on found a great deal of of value in Epicurionism because it was more about finding tranquility and peacefulness. And so again, that's another one where we have to sort of distinguish the words. And so it's not just pleasure, it's specifically atraxia, which is like a a tranquility and an absence of pain. and as well as aonia which is an absence of specifically bodily pain. So again you definitely don't want to get hung over because that would be causing you pain. Um so and similarly if you eat too much then you will also be in pain. So it's it was more focus on enjoying simple pleasures and having a life of simplicity that was rewarding. Uh, so a perfect example I've always thought of encapsulating an epicurian value, if I may, is noticing when you're drinking your cup of coffee that it's exactly the right temperature. And it's that's a simple, easy pleasure. And it's a daily pleasure. It's something small that we can all do. And I think there's a great deal of value in everyone's life, modern and ancient, in taking moments and and appreciating being grateful and enjoying small simple pleasures. And so for for the for me at least, that's one of my biggest takeaways that I like. Um for Senica um he also said that that he really en appreciated the the sort of putting a value on those simple daily things. Um and specifically there there was a huge commitment to friendship um which Senica was a big fan of. Uh there's a a commitment to moderation which again works very well with with stoicism and this idea of of inner peace. So um I think he quotes Epicurius mostly for for moral from his moral letters and that's again and in those letters Epicurius advises simplicity the cultivation of calm and appreciation of of daily life. Um but I do love that you know Senica was like I think he said we're stoics but we're allowed to take a few lessons from the enemy's camp. So I think there's a there's an a value in acknowledging eclect eclectism and I think while Senica was most certainly a stoic I think he he felt he could enrich stoicism by taking some lessons from from other ancient philosophies and he also um found value in cynicism uh as well as uh platonism. and and other philosophies. So he he did he he absorbed a lot of the ancient philosophies. >> Yeah, he certainly did. We're perhaps always of two minds on this podcast. It's always good fun to uh poke at the Epicurans a bit as philosophical rivals, but at the same time there is a I think there's a lot of wisdom in that tradition and Epicurans and Stoicism today perhaps in their modern instantiations are more similar than they are different apart from some some fundamental uh philosophical disagreements. I suppose I've a stoic frame on what's useful about the Epicurans that I've toyed with a little bit is that of course the Stoics don't think life is all about pleasure but you could sort of see the Epicurans Epicurus in particular as an expert on pleasure and it's certainly something that's preferable and he tells you how to pursue it well uh which is a part of any ordinary and good human life even if according to Stoics of course it's not what life is all I think the one big contrast is their views on politics as well. Like the Stoics were certainly it's important to be involved uh with politics and and how the human society is run. But the Epicurans really were like we we we can just exit from this, you know, we're just going to opt out fully. we're going to live in our peaceful communities with our friends and not get involved uh with the messier side of politics. And I'll be honest, there's definitely times when I can see both aspects of that. There's definitely times I think it might be nice just to take a break from it all and go to the mountains and hang out with your buddies. >> Yeah, I think so. I think there's also the that I think that's that's great to bring up. And something I've also wondered about from the Stoic perspective is look, most of these stoics are talking to effectively Roman uh aristocrats, nobles and such who had a chance of becoming serious political players. But you know, would they have the same message for people today whose political power is nowhere near the level of someone who had had a chance of holding a a serious office? Perhaps their advice might look more like the Epicurans for the typical person. I don't know. That's an excellent point and yes, because now we we can be reading and understanding philosophy anywhere in the world from any social position and and social background without having to I mean maybe it's even more torturous if you if you have to feel like you should be involved in politics but you it's out of your control then maybe it's better to >> to embrace what you have and value your friendships in your day-to-day life. Yeah, I suppose so. Or perhaps there are some politics worth becoming involved in, others not, and uh and so on. That's uh yeah, that's an important question. Awesome. Well, we've leaped through quite a lot, blitz through three different schools, I suppose, to the Stoics. Um is there anything else you you want to touch on? You know, I I would like, if I may, to talk a little bit about the nature of eclecticism and the kind of I like to call it the art of cherry-picking in a way. And I do think it's interesting because while Senica did a little bit of that, uh, Cicero was very very famously an eclectic. Um, and I do think that there's a huge value in spending a little time being steeped in in other philosophies to both assure oneself in the positions that they do feel strongly in and have those have that tension so that you have that resolution. uh as well as to find places that where where they other philosophies might be useful and I think it's very valuable with regards to having prepped different philosophies for different times in one's life or for different reasons. So, as you say, like there's there's different moments when you're old or young or you're raising a child or you're in military service. At different times, we're going to require different tools. And I like to kind of if it maybe it's a tired metaphor, but I do see uh philosophy is sort of a toolbox and there are different tools that are necessary for different times. So I think it's it's certainly valuable and I often like to think actually of of Zenoitium being one of the the OGs of eclecticism because you know he really was synthesizing a lot of philosophy that was going around with cynicism and Socrates and from that founded stoicism. So it's I think that tradition of understanding different standpoints and seeing what what works and what doesn't work is is a long and storied tradition. Yeah, I'm glad you bring that up. And um it is interesting to think about Zeno as an eclectic and perhaps you see talking about Senica and his uh interaction with the Epicurans, but also of course Marcus Aurelia. times uh people note how platonic some of his meditations sound and I think you see uh the necessity of wrestling with other philosophies exploring other philosophies for all of all of these figures really who are at some level uh eclectics even if they don't reach the level of Cicero we did cover Cicero's on ends earlier this this year as a sort short podcast series so I definitely encourage listeners to check out Cicero in particular. I think he's a a rich absolutely rich both historical and philosophical resource that we're lucky lucky to have. >> Yeah, I would definitely second that. I I think he's fascinating. And with all of these different philosophers, they're also responding to different times in history. So it in our own world wherever you're located or your listeners are located and the world is changing again back to Heraclitus always changing you can you can definitely draw inspiration from different philosophers who are facing different challenges uh and see how they responded to them. So, it's Cicero does definitely bring together a lot though and if you were to get a sort of one-stop shop for understanding a lot of philosophy, Cisero is a great place to go. >> Yeah, absolutely. Perfect. Well, thanks so much for joining. >> Thank you so much for having me. >> Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com and please get in touch with us at Stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
