---
title: "Effective Altruism as a Life Philosophy (Episode 198)"
slug: effective-altruism-as-a-life-philosophy
episode_number: 198
youtube_id: gBoJAl22J_M
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gBoJAl22J_M
upload_date: 2025-08-26
duration: 59:24
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Michael Tromblé >> and I'm Caleb Ponttoveros >> and today we're we're gonna be talking about effective altruism. Um, some of you might be familiar with it, some of you might not, but I think it's a it's a really cool modern philosophical movement and we're going to look at it as a through the lens of a life philosophy. So if you think of stoicism as a philosophy of life, skepticism, existentialism, what would it what would it mean to think of effective altruism as a philosophy of life? What does that entail? What does that commit you to? And then um maybe looking at some of at the end some contrast compare and contrast with stoicism just to draw out some of the implications there. Before we jump into what is effective altruism, any other context you wanted to give, Kale? >> Yeah. Well, uh, I think one way to think about effective altruism is it's as a philosophical movement, but also a social and political one. And I would say it's not especially large, but it has an outsized impact for its size. Uh, which um, and perhaps like a few other movements like that is is worth thinking about uh, for that for that reason. or maybe we'll focus a little less on the social matters but as you say think about it from the standpoint of a philosophy of life and I think in a sense one could be an effective altruist uh and a stoic at the same time they're not necessarily uh exclusive there is a way of sketching out effective altruism and stoicism where they do become into into conflict perhaps in a similar way where you can in a sense be a Christian in a stoic but in another sense uh fundamentally uh you can't be So I think that's that's what we're going to be uh drawing upon. And I should say effective altruism is something I've thought about a lot. I thought about it before I encountered stoicism probably first started thinking about the issue in 2011 and I've been involved in a variety of different effective altruist groups though am less so now. So uh it is something I' I've thought about a lot. I should say I have a vested interest in history in effective altruism. Uh but uh Michael's coming at it from the more impartial >> impartial and maybe a bit more of a layman territory here. You're the you're the expert. You can sense check. I prepared these notes, but uh happy for you to push back and I don't want to frontload too much because I don't want to leave the suspense if people aren't familiar with it as a movement, but it's one that I've also thought was quite interesting. We're kind of every once in a while you encounter something that appeals to your philosophical intuitions. Maybe that's not a great reason for prioritizing it over another philosophical school, but this is one of those for me. Like stoicism, this is one that I thought, "Ooh, that's really interesting. This is getting at something important." Um, so but but but didn't um didn't get involved in the in the movement the same way you did. >> Um, so let's jump into it just just to want to at least put a definition on the table so we can we can um talk about those other points with some context. So what is effective altruism? So I took this straight from the effective altruism website. It says effective altruism is a project that aims to find the best ways to help others and put them into practice. So I think of it as it has both this this has a this is this is also from the website but it has this research component which is that it aims to find the most pressing problems. So there's this like kind of ep epistemological position which is like we need to correctly find the the biggest problems and the best solutions to them. And then there's almost like an ethical or behavioral component which is and then we need to collectively act in a way that solves those problems as effectively as possible and um you know uses those findings what we've discovered and measured correctly to do good. Um, as the the website goes on to say, the pro this project matters because while many attempts to do good fail, some are enormously effective. For instance, some charities help a hundred or even a thousand times as many people as others when given the same amount of resources. This means that by thinking carefully about the best ways to help, we can do far more to tackle the world's biggest problems. So that's effective altruism, I think, in its in its fullome way of framing it. So it's it's got that yeah again that factual component what are the biggest problems that humans have the most a degree of influence over the most capacity to solve and then that that practical behavioral um question of how do we then organize ourselves and and act to then solve those problems. So I it places an emphasis on the what and the how in that way. Um, and then I wanted to jump to what does that mean as a philosophy of life? What are some of its key characteristics as a philosophy of life? But anything else you want to give on that definition? >> Well, just just to maybe one way to make this definition a slight more philosophically concrete. Uh, one of the first effective altruist type papers at least as a modern movement was by a fellow named Peter Singer. He wrote a paper called famine, affluence and morality and it was essentially about how you can uh how essentially argued that people in developed affluent nations have a moral duty to give to charity and one that's comparable to the moral duty one has to save a drowning child. And I think there's a you can see how that sort of is related to effective altruism where it's this idea of thinking about how to do the most good. Not necessarily taking sort of like common sense ethics as you know the end all beall but thinking about you know abstractly if you if you want to do the most good what does that mean? That might mean you start prioritizing the interests of people far away from you. That might mean not necessarily taking on a career that's seen as altruistic, but doing the most effective thing and this sort of thing. So that's just maybe one way to sketch it out a little bit more. I know I know we'll keep on doing that, but >> yeah, that's No, I think that's really helpful. Gives some color to it. So that's that famous thought experiment, Peter Singer's famous thought experiment where, you know, our ethical intuitions tell us if we were walking by a pond or some sort of shallow body of water and a child was drowning and we were like, uh, I could save that child, but I would get my new Nike shoes, my new $500 beautiful Nike shoes dirty. Um, so I'm not going to save them. I'm gonna let them drown. Our kind of ethical intuition is there's something really wrong there. And so the the logical conclusion to that is that if I have $500 of disposable income and I can donate that to a developing nation or an effective charity elsewhere in the world and save a life, then I have then not doing that is just as bad as allowing the child to drown. And then you know there's there's these common counterarguments that like well are you saying we should give away all our money and not have anything? And I think people take different approaches to this, but one is just a common sense approach that I think Peter Singer takes, which is well, you should at least do things that would not have a major negative impact on your life. And many people in in developed nations have the kind of disposable income that don't losing $1,000, $2,000 would not have a significant major negative impact on your life. Some for some people that would that's that's you know, your rent and your groceries. But for many people in a country like the United States um which we're both in, losing $2,000 is um is inconsequential but has a major impact for other in for other people. And so I I I I also viewed it as this kind of flipping when I first learned about it as you you view charity as this like well there's nothing wrong with not donating but if you donate you're a great person and there's this almost this flip Peter Sing almost flips it in this other way where it's like well if you don't donate and you have the capacity to do so without it harming the quality of your life that's actually a major flaw um or major issue. Um and then and then the you might know more about these these movements now but as as you pointed out so then the implication of that is that you know if you're trying to do the most good you're trying to be as effective as possible it probably means looking for these effective charities or effective movements being impartial about which what is effective so not you know a lot a lot of the time we I think a common effective altruist criticism would be that we sometimes do good because we want feel good. So, we do the good things that make us feel the best about ourselves. I don't know if effective altruism takes this argument, but I would I would present this argument. So, maybe we help people in our community even though they don't need as much help because, you know, it makes us look good in the community. It showers us with praise. there's this way of kind of being um displaying uh you know look at look at how much I helped this uh person at school or or my neighbor um where the effective altruists would more take the stance of okay well but who are the people in the world that would actually benefit from your money or your time and it's often not the ones that make us kind of feel the best and that can kind of be a I take that as the as the what part that kind of epistemological question we often make a mistake judgments about the best place to put our time, money, effort to make a good result. Um, but with that framing in mind, I'll go through my framework of I think what effective altruism is committed to as a philosophy of life. I think first, so if we if these examples we've talked about first, it's it's broadly consequentialist. So its goal is to produce the best aggregate outcomes. Um, so to do the most possible good. So if you if when we think about stoicism we think about as a philosophy of life it makes a claim about what it is to be a great person. For stoicism that's to live with virtue. I think for effective altruism it's to have lived a good life is to have produced the most benefit for humanity uh or at least a sizable benefit for humanity given the situation you were born into. So if you're in a position to do a lot of good with a relative little harm to yourself, you're born into a position of a lot of charity or in a developed nation, then to be a good person is to um you know have made good on that potential to have maximized that potential in terms of consequences. So if you kind of if you donate your money to an ineffective charity and nothing really happens, well then you don't get a free pass. You have to also be discerning about where that help is act discerning about which um actions are actually helpful and bring them the most beneficial consequences. I think that's the effective part that consequentialism and then the altruist part is that it's it's incredibly cosmopolitan. So all people in effect of altruism are seen as relatively equal. We were talking about this bit, Caleb. I think it'd be go too far to say they're uh absolutely equal, but they're relatively equal. So, I should care about the suffering of a child in Africa. Maybe not as much as my own child, but as much as any child I do not know. Just because the the the the child is in Africa and I've never been to Africa doesn't mean I should place them below um you know I would say children closer by or things that I have some sort of sentimental attachment to. That's kind of a bit of a poor reason. Uh I I've made my community too small. Want to be cosmopolitan in that community. Um we can't use distance as an excuse for less distance or familiarity as an excuse for less care. So as a philosophy of life you need to be consequentialist to so try to maximize good you need to be cosmopolitan so you extend the sphere of who who's good matters really broad and one thing that the effective altruists do is they extend that you know they sometimes don't even stop at cosmopolitanism um so it's it's really popular in these movements you know Peter Singer talks a lot about animal welfare I I haven't I haven't read his books on animal ethics, but I know that's something that that he's he's an important member of that movement. Will McKascal, who's a important member of effective altruism, also has a book called what we owe the future. Um, which is about our obligations to future generations. So, it's it's it's again this really expansive view of who and what matters. Um, includes not just the world, but maybe non-human animals, maybe future generations. And then um the last point and I'll pass it back to you Caleb is that I think when I think about if I had to distill you if you if you say stoicism is about virtue uh um cynicism is about freedom. If you if I had to distill effective altruism to one idea like one sentence as a as a way of a philosophy as a way of life I would say it's it's internal consistency. So, it's this idea to like put your money where your mouth is. Um, if you claim humans matter, which most of us would claim, how would you live in a way that's internally consistent to that claim? What does it mean to actually follow through on the belief that humans matter? Um, if you care about animal welfare, what does it mean to follow through on those ideas? And maybe that means I actually have an obligation to set up the world to be productive and healthy for future generations because those future generations are humans and I'm not going to make this uh mistake just because um you know I I'm not attached to people that that don't exist yet or I don't have this kind of emotional attachment to people far away from me. So that that I think is like if I had to if I had to put it into a sentence um you know that's the way that I would think about it. And so that means, you know, we don't just debate these topics. [Music] A major aspect of effective altruism is the donation of a portion of your income consistently to charity. Um we we have to we have to again spend our time and our money supporting these things. And then we also just don't dedicate our lives to helping people. I've spoke on this before, but the effective part, we don't just help people in a way that makes us feel good. We think really coherently uh and strategically about the ways to be the most helpful to help the most people as effectively as possible. Um, yeah, I think about this. When I think about this, I think about sometimes there's this criticism. I watch a lot of true crime and sometimes there's this criticism around some small girl will go missing and then, you know, all the helicopters will be out and they'll be like, you know, the entire police force will be combing the forest to try to because it's like a little girl that's missing. And I think the effect of altruism is this kind of criticism of that kind of inconsistency where you you you spend so much resources because it's like a little girl but you know there there are people starving on the streets there are um there's famine in other countries and we're not kind of giving that consistency and it's not a kind of like what aboutism it's the effect of altruist also then goes and then I will then go and help those causes. I will then go and put my money where my m my mouth is there. see a bit of a brain dump there, but what are your thoughts about that? >> I think it's a useful way to construe effective altruism. It's, as you say, broadly consequentialist in in terms of prioritizing the consequences of our actions and thinking about perhaps um ranking different problems, actions, and such by their scale. It's cosmopolitan. You could say it's egalitarian would be another way to put it. Like you shouldn't have a or at least not without significant justification. You shouldn't be that partial to you know some people because they happen to be closer to you because they happen to be members of the same species and such. And and that does lead to this sort of expansive view of who and what matters. Perhaps one way to see it as a philosophy of life is to take the extreme case like where an effective altruist is close to a moral saint. You know, they organize their life around the principle of how can I do the most good and they obsess over that in any decision they make. And I think it's fair to say that that that might be a a target for many effective altruists, but not uh one they achieve in the same way perhaps a sage is a target for the stoic or >> uh Jesus might be a target for a Christian. But you can think of you know effective altruism as a life philosophy that is the organizing principle. How do I do a significant amount of good in my life? And uh that requires thinking about you know what does what am I capable of what are the causes that are the most good and uh also of and then of course action you know doing the actions becoming the kind of person who uh does the most good so I think that's one way to to perhaps think about is you just have a like that per you know altruism effective altruism becomes an organizing principle of your life that's that's the life philosophy and it should be understood as as you described it with these consequentialist egalitarian uh aspects to it >> yeah I mean that's a good distinction if you if you adopt what does it mean to adopt as a philosophy of life because the same way somebody can take a stoic tool we talk about this metaphor and put the tool in their tool belt and they can pull out the dichotomy of control when they're stressed about uh you know their business deal that doesn't make them a stoic uh not a deep stoic. Um the same way I you know if I'm the kind of person who's making a donation and I do some research into where my donation is going and pick one that's more effective than another that doesn't make me an effective altruist. what it would be to live as a philosophy of life is to organize your life around given the position I was born into, how do I maximize the good that I do with these consequentialist and egalitarian positions as we already talked about. Yeah, I think that's that's bang on. And so that's the next part I I have in these notes here is like how to actually be an effective altruist, which means what would it look like to organize your life around these principles? As we just mentioned, many different ways to do this, but like one is this concept of 80,000 hours in a high impact career. So something the effective altruist movement argues for is that look, if we want to maximize our positive impact in the world, this is probably best achieved by how we direct our labor um instead of these vague commitments of being kind or being helpful. So, we have 80,000 working hours over our life and we should strategize how to best use those hours to help others. Um, so maybe you become the head of a charity or work in policy. Um maybe you the the one thing they argue for as well is that maybe it's something as you said previously that doesn't even look appealing like maybe you just become um because you have a certain set of skills you become a very high earning uh corporate lawyer and you know there's nothing charitable about your work but what you do is you make obscene amounts of money and you earmark 20% of that 25% whatever amount for charity and then you know instead of you being an ineffective ive member of a of a movement that doesn't maximize your potential. You maximize your talents into a high earning position and then you you donate that money um towards a group of people who are more specialized in actually then using that money to carry out good and to do good. Um so it's kind of like I guess I'm keep thinking about these hero analogies. It's kind of like this criticism of Batman, right? It would be like, I just made this up. This is not an effective altruism thing, but it would be like if Batman really wanted to do good, instead of being this like selfish billionaire that then goes and does some vigilanteism justice and he feels good and he's like, "I'm a hero." He would really, you know, cut out the man in the cape stuff, focus on what he's good at, which is like the, you know, accumulation of capital, and then distribute that to the most effective charities possible. That would be what Batman would look like as an as an effective altruist. And so another way another way to live your life like that. So one is like how you think about your career and your labor. Another way is the identification and support of high impact charities. So you having a having a good knowledge base of what are the biggest problems in the world right now that that humans have the most capacity to solve? what are the organizations that are most effectively solving that you know easy example is think of something like uh malaria um in Africa or something like this um which is we understand how to solve it we have the we have the technology to prevent these cases um but we just don't have the capital to do so and so identify some of these and redirect your your money towards that when you're in a position to do so um so I I think that's that's another one. If if you know if you were an effective altruist, then you have a clear sense of where your excess money should be going. And then I think the third way to live that which these other ones hit on, but really a science-based understanding of the good. So I think what unifies all these different ways of being an effective altruist is this is this really clear focus on effective. It's not about dedicating your time, but thinking really critically about the the how problems that are on a large scale that we have a strong ability to influence that no one is targeting. Um, you know, so when we allow factory farming to exist, for example, that's like an animal welfare argument, which is something that we we have alternatives to this that's in our control. Um, we have mechanisms of addressing that. Um that might be that might be an example of um but just examples like this of of large scales large scale solutions that are not based on again what feels good but what is most effective thoughts on these? Yeah, I think there's a there's certainly a lot of there's a lot of discussion on in the effective altruist community and perhaps their critics on what the sort of the most effective ways to live are the most effective things to do are in terms of causes whether it's global development, pandemic preparedness, improving that government institutions, AI safety, animal welfare, you know, there's an important list I think that's that's worth a very important list that's worth thinking about. Um but then once you think about causes of course they're the actual action they're the actions in question what what actually promotes economic development or what is the most effective ways to improve institutions and so on. So there's certainly a lot to say there. I suppose the the main theme to draw out from from this is that I think perhaps in a sense um pe many people of different life philosophies can take a scientific approach to doing good. Take the sort of empirical approach to doing good and they may even think they are doing that already without effective altruism. It's it's almost like the totalizing approach of effective altruism that makes it unique. So if you're thinking about a career, then you're thinking about what's the best career I can take. Uh if you're thinking about what to study, then you're thinking about these in terms of an altruistic lens as opposed to perhaps just thinking about in terms of you know my personal fit or trying to I don't know, you know, find my passion, achieve my dreams or something like this, whatever other heristic you might have. Yeah, I think that's right. So instead of that's the the tool is well I know this person like somebody might do the tool which is I know I'm going to donate some money. I'm going to pick the most effective charity to donate to. That's like one aspect of the lens. Um but you're not it's not really a philosophy of life at this point. If you were to live the philosophy of life at this point, putting these together, you'd have decided a high impact career. Impact being judged by your capacity to do good. You would have identified the charities or other mechanisms by which to do the most good. So if I'm going to get a high paying career, I can donate money here. If I'm doing a high a high impact job, it's because I'm participating in these charities or otherwise, you know, economic development. um you know pandem pandemic preparedness these examples you were mentioning I've kind of and I think that kind of comes back to the stoic example of like what are you actually good at as well so instead of as you were saying instead of well this is what I'm most passionate about or this is what I enjoy it's like no what do you have a particular talent for and what can that talent um do to maximize the benefit of of other people um and then and then that's easy to say in the abstract But then I I think that um when you actually live that science-based understanding of doing good, it's really hard. You need to be like really honest with yourself and not allow something to become a kind of a pet project or a passion project. Like what does it mean to genuinely continually update your frame of reference for what does the most good? And maybe maybe it's not, you know, maybe it's not so silly as like everybody who's doing the second or third most good is terrible. uh like I'm I'm sure as you said there's probably an important list of five to 10 things that would qualify but you know being willing to update that list if new information comes out being willing to change that frame of reference and not just I would assume it would be very tempting to emotionally invest in a cause uh and get really bought into it and then be really resistant to other to evidence that maybe it's not as effective as you thought it was or maybe it wasn't actually helpful and what It would it would take quite a lot of internal character to consistently update that frame of reference. I know that that's that's a very challenging part. >> Yeah, I agree. >> That's I think maybe that's another I think that's just a core component of effectiveness is almost applying these kinds of mindsets people have in other domains. People talk about, you know, the importance of pursuing the truth, not lying to yourself when you're creating a business or you're trying to discover, you know, underlying facts of reality as a scientist. It's sort of taking that truth seeking mindset to um uh, you know, thinking about uh these questions of picking the cause you want to promote, thinking through what does, you know, making the world a better place actually look like? you know, what does that mean? And being willing to change your mind if you uh realize there's a better account. >> Yeah. Or being willing to do something boring and not sexy. Um as well, >> which I think is challenging. I think it's really easy to do the right thing. This is kind of Aristotle's position. Aristotle's position is like habituate yourself. So doing the right thing is fun and feels good. I think it's really easy to do the right thing if it's very cool. It's harder to do the right thing if it's either unpopular or um maybe even worse just like totally apa people are just totally apathetic to it. >> Mhm. >> Um and so going back to that superhero example, I think these are funny and they're they're helpful for me. we've talked about before in this examp there's a criticism of utilitarianism that is basically something like well if utilitarianism was true and Superman existed Superman was a real person well then he'd have to spend his entire life just like pushing a turbine that generated renewable energy for people something like this like you know he if if utilitarianism is true then being kind of like a hero or a good person doesn't look like going off and doing these like really meaningful, personally fulfilling tasks. It might look like just like boringly churning out um renewable energy for half the world, which Superman could do if he could, you know, or the Flash could do. And I think the effect of altruists just kind of bite the bullet on that one. I mean, maybe they say, "Well, yeah, maybe he does it like 40 hours a week." Like, we leave time for people to be people, >> you know? You know, but in so far as Superman can do that without it becoming a terrible part, like without becoming a lifering component of his life, then yeah, then Superman should zoom out, think about the best thing his superpowers could do, and it's probably not, you know, tying up bank robbers. Um, it's probably something that's a lot less sexy and a lot less cool. I think that's fun. I think that's fun that they bite the bullet on that. Um, do you do you agree with that? >> That uh agree with that. This that's this is too demanding objection. They mostly just bite the bullet on it. Agree with that in particular. >> Yeah. I mean both both both that they bite the bullet on the too demanding. I'm not sure if it is the two demanding objective because or objection I guess there there's two parts of that. The too demanding objection is something like the kind of life this asks you to live is like not feasible or or it's too demanding. But there's this other I think this kind of virtue ethic objection where there's like an intuition that Superman going out saving people and helping people seems more courageous and heroic and like a better person intuitively than the Superman who's just like pushing, you know, churning something that generates energy for people. And that's the kind of virtue ethic versus consequentialist argument. And it's a criticism of consequentialism in that you that's that doesn't seem like the the best way to live. And if you take it to its logical conclusion, it seems like it produces people that aren't, you know, courageous, kind people. They're just these kind of maximizers, like kind of like these logistic maximization um calculators. And I think effective altruism bites the bullet on that and says, "Well, if Superman was real, then yeah, then he he would be a a worse person if he prioritized the kind of good that was ineffective by going around saving people, you know, flying around um Manhattan equivalent. And what he should actually do is figure out, you know, what might actually be the best thing to do for his powers might actually be something that's like not very heroic, is a bit more boring, but that would be what he would be moral morally obligated to do. And it would be a moral failing to not do that, which I guess can get can become too demanding if you're asking them to him to do it, you know, >> 80 hours a week, but not but not 40. >> Yeah, I I suppose I understand. It's sort of um reminds me of Watchmen and there's a the Aussie Mandas character who Do you know Watchmen? >> Yes. >> Okay. Well, anyway, >> we should probably explain it for >> maybe I won't explain it just cuz uh we're running Well, maybe let's see how can I do this quickly. It's there's um there's a Watchmen is sort of a different take on superheroes. And one way to interpret the book is different characters represent different forms of ethics. And there's a utilitarian character uh Azymandas who is a superhero but sort of you learn exercises his powers by in his view engaging in mass deception in order to prevent a nuclear holocaust and that's his view of the of what his actions were. So there's a sense in which that it's not going around, you know, beating up villains, which I think that's that character in particular calls schoolyard ethics. It's almost a kind of behindthe-scenes historical scheming which I think there's a natural reading of that book where it's a critic as a criticism of utilitarianism but I think that's at least closer to the of the effect of altruist reading of a superhero where a superhero would be doing something creative and that's that is thinking like effective altruist and it's not ne I think there is a version of that that is a criticism of effective altruism but it's not also it's not necessarily a criticism and perhaps can be praised of the philosophy as Yeah. Um, and I think that's okay. Like I think that I think if that that's coherent and consistent to me. Um, that I mean what what it means to be a good person might be something a bit more boring than the traditional superhero is is is my take away from that. And I think that's >> yeah that's that's a that's a useful reframing. Um great. Anything else to add on effect of altruism as a philosophy of life before we get into some comparisons and differences with stoicism? >> No, let's jump into it. >> Cool. So I think it's always useful to go back and this is primarily a stoicism podcast and it's always useful to go back to stoicism just to draw out the implications uh of these different philosophies of life. So starting with with things that are are similar with stoicism. So one is the cosmopolitan aspect of it. Um so the stoics they were pioneers in this idea of expanding our concern to all humans. Um all humans matter to stoics. We're all citizens of the universe. I think the stoics rely more um on role ethics. We'll get into that in the the differences the disagreements than maybe the effect of altruist does. But there's definitely this idea of we should expand our concern beyond our immediate family, city, country. Um we should care about all humans. Um and um you know in virtue of them being humans. The second thing is this idea of um this this privileging of reason. Um so I think in both movements both philosophies of life thinking reason and rationality should direct our behavior. So the the Stoics um you know they're not interested in feeling moral but being moral and actually doing good. I wouldn't say the Stoic is consequentialist and that what determines good is not the outcome. Um but what determines good is if you actually made the right choice. Right? It's not about um not about feeling good or feeling like a good person or you know being confident that you're kind. It's about actually being kind and that you can fail to do that if you misunderstand a situation. If you misread the context, you can have made the you can have done something you thought was courageous and it wasn't courageous. Um basically the point is that you can be mistaken about ethical judgments. And so you need to to to be moral means really um thinking things through a certain degree of knowledge I suppose um about in for effective altruism what's actually effective and for stoicism what's actually virtuous. And then a third similarity I think is that that inter that emphasis on internal consistency. Um you know the stoics had no time for hypocrisy. Um you you got to put your money where your mouth is. If you commit to something, you got to live it or at least, you know, attempt to become the kind of person who lives in accordance with it. And I think effective altruism is the same way, which is um, you know, at the end of the day, we're we're we're practicing this or or following this this school of thought to modify our behavior and to improve our behavior. And if we're not doing that, then um our practice is failing. >> Yeah. Perhaps another similarity, I agree with that 100%. Another similarity is that both life philosophies are transformative. I think it's clear how stoicism focuses on transforming who you are. But I think sometimes people hear about effective altruism and they they think oh everyone they're really trying to do good and you know effectiveness maybe that's a coarse way to put it but they're thinking you know they just have different values about what's good or you know they're they're trying their best and so on. But um the effect of altruist framing on this is that uh you know you come into the world not as an effective altruist but with all these sort of normal human drives that are not focused on altruistic tendencies. When they are altruistic perhaps they're not effective. So it does de demand a kind of a personal transformation to be to move your attention to doing the most good and uh and perhaps that's underrated. Yeah, I like that idea. Well, one I guess here's one question with the transformative aspect. If I was if I was Elon Musk and I donated $50 billion to a charity, am I now an effective altruist or am I pretending to be an effective altruist? This would be my criticism of the idea of the effectual or my counter to your argument because Elon Musk would not be a stoic. You I mean, if you're doing this to impress people, you'd not be a stoic. you're not, you know, you're not doing it for the right reasons. Does effective altruism care about the right reasons is is I guess my question. And if not, how transformative can it be? >> Well, I think personally if you're adopting it as a life philosophy, then it's uh transformative and it might be a little bit of an issue where you can have someone who behaves in a stoic way, but do you identify them as a stoic? Maybe maybe not. So >> um there is that and there's also the issue of uh evaluating character even though that's not primary to the effect of altruist focus. There is something to the idea that you want to do it do that because character is predictive of future actions and um >> you know it doesn't matter who you are because that's going to determine how much good you end up doing. So perhaps that that's another variable where yeah people they can do things that were altruistic that were effective but that maybe more of a matter of getting lucky perhaps or >> they had some other purpose they were serving than uh doing that as an effective altruist. I mean, I guess my criticism is just a criticism you could levy against any consequentialist school, which is that, you know, people could accidentally do things that raise utility or something like that. It's it's really just like a virtue ethic objection to consequentialist schools, but your way of framing it is that well, we still care about character because character tends to predict your capacity to be effective and altruistic in the future or effective and altruistic through time. And so if you if you really want to adopt it as a life philosophy, um you need to have that kind of transformative aspect of it. Um yeah, I think I'm just I think I'm just wrestling with this idea of like virtue ethics versus consequentialism. And one of the things that virtue Yeah. Just just that that sometimes in consequentialist thinking you're going to do the right thing for the wrong reasons. And sometimes that just happens. But as as a philosophy of life can't be for the wrong reasons. Otherwise, you're not you're not living it as a philosophy of life. >> Yeah. I mean, I think I do think there is some difference there. And perhaps it gets back to the uh objection where you're talking about uh Superman and uh sort of like the standard maybe there are some ways of doing good that don't develop positive character attributes. And uh it's always a little bit tricky to to reason about this but I do think for one criticism effect of altruism it's almost like a financialization of the good. You know you're thinking about how do I promote the good abstractly you think about you know questions of scale contribution. you almost start talking like um a venture capitalist when you're thinking about you know how to donate or this this sort of thing and then it becomes detached from ordinary moral concerns and perhaps there's something essential to morality that resists this kind of financialization. I think that's just what a most non-consequentialist will say. And in so far as you are thinking too abstractly, uh that's a you know that's just that's a con of of effective altruism. >> Yeah, I think that I think that hits on it. It becomes this kind of you know can someone pay their way out of being a bad person because you've abstracted out to this financialization. I think there's something about the effect of altruism where it's it has this kind of like relative aspect to it which I like where the kind of demands on lower income people are lower less affluent people are lower than the demands on more affluent people like out of the demands upon you kind of scale. Um, so it's it's it's not like the person who donates a million dollars is better than the person who donates 10, even though one's made a larger impact because it is like um relative to you your potential, you know, your impact um your your potential for impact. Um yeah, so that resolves a little bit that resolves another issue, but I'm I'm jumping ahead to kind of criticisms. I got too excited. Um so moving to the next part those are the the um agreements with stois stoicism cosmopolitanism focus on reason focus on internal consistency so matching your beliefs to behavior and then this transformative aspect and then differences with stoicism and criticisms. First is I would say is this extreme cosmopolitanism. Um this might be I think it's certainly more cosmopolitan than stoicism is. Um so stoicism because of role ethics I think still privileges your family to a large degree um your community to a large degree. And so it's tough because stoicism was not around in a time where you could be effective in a developing nation. I mean I don't know if we would use the term developing nation but stoicism didn't exist wasn't around in a period where you could um you know properly understand the impact you could have on a country in a different part of the world. So maybe this is an unfair criticism but certainly as they're written the stoics are less cosmopolitan than the effective altruists. there's this notion of thinking about you know the entire world as your all humans as part of um your polus your city um but there wasn't this focus on I would say intervening in areas outside of your own domain and I guess I I've tried to soften that with maybe a knowledge claim which is maybe just you know the stoics knew you didn't have the knowledge to do that effectively where you could make an impact with your brother your neighbor your family um so maybe maybe that's maybe that softens the objection slightly. Um, another another objection is that it can be too demanding. So, it it's not psychologically realistic for most people. Um, this is a criticism that also gets levied against stoicism. You know, this idea of knowledge or the sage is not achievable. Um, but if effective altruism taken to the extreme to me seems to be even more demanding than extreme stoicism because extreme stoicism is walking around with knowledge and virtue. But effective altruism, I feel if you took it to an extreme, that saint-like perspective would be almost this like no self, like you're doing everything for the impact it has on other people. And I don't know if that's I have some sort of intuition that that's like um a strange way to live when taken to an extreme and not really a feasible way to live. So you're kind of always setting yourself up for failure. Again, maybe that always applies to stoicism as well. And then a third a third one, we'll we'll go back through these, but a third one is that um maybe um this this comes back to the point you were living with the abstract the you know um financialization or you know um thinking about thinking about living well in terms of this calculation of benefits and harms. um maybe that's just not the right away way to approach living and that the question of how we should deal with other people is better handled by role ethics. Um one where our obligations differ quite substantially. You know, everybody's owed the same minimum amount of respect, but our obligations change quite substantially depending on the roles or identities that overlap or we share with other people. And that seems to me to be a more I don't know grounded or human way of calc of dealing with um that aspect of of living well or philosophy of life. So those are the big picture got the cosmopolitanism the demands and then this kind of calculation benefits maximization approach that's maybe better handled by role ethics. Um what do you think about those? Yeah, I do think maybe one way to put the the difference between a stoicism on the cosmopolitan and effective altruism on the cosmopolitan cosmopolitanism front is that stoicism is what's sometimes called a rooted form of cosmopolitanism where you have these different relations with people. Uh and that is um you know that's just essential to to who you are. So you you are a brother, parent, neighbor in addition to, you know, just being a human being, in addition to being a fellow citizen. And in that way, you're you're it's not a pure sort of absolute utilitarian view on the world where everyone's treated equally in sort of a flat way and you're just trying to distribute the good to everyone considered equally. Instead, you are thinking about, you know, who you happen to be. And I think I think this probably gets into that last difference as well, thinking about those roles you have. You know, Marcus Aurelius says, you know, as a man, he's a citizen of the universe. As Marcus Aurelius, he's a Roman. And I think both of those things matter to to the Stoic. Whereas perhaps I think with effective altruism, there's always this overarching question or question in the background, you know, what does the most good? And that can really sort of overturn things or cause you to pivot uh in a way where maybe you don't end up prioritizing some ordinary roles uh as much as uh as much as you should on on on other life on other life philosophies. >> Yeah, I hadn't heard of that phrase rooted cosmopolitan rooted cosmopolitanism before. I really like that. that captures really well the that idea of those stoic circles while still having that full obligate or still having that obligation to you know all people. >> Yeah, the two demanding objection. I think that's interesting. Perhaps the effect of altruist move here is you try to aim at what's psychologically realistic. I think they can sort of take a leaf out of the Stokes book or whatever the phrase is and thinking about, you know, what's up what's up to you? what can you actually do? And in terms of just who different people are focusing on doing good over the long term, that's going to some people are going to be able to dedicate their life to that. Others, they might take that as a significant part of their project, but just because of uh their makeup, what's possible, they might need more uh rest time, more kinds of focus on things that are not necessarily good. I think perhaps it's this this sort of thing is perhaps easiest to think of outside of the moral context where if you read a biography about you know some famous politician or something of this sort and you just see how dedicated they were to obtaining their own personal power. I think that's obviously something uh to those people's psychology that not a lot of people have um and perhaps isn't even even possible for most people to you know have that sort of you know develop that sort of willingness to obtain power at whatever cost and we probably say the same thing about doing doing good and it's just going to be uh it is a demanding philosophy there's no doubt about that but there is uh you know reality is a constraint and effective altruist is certainly going not deny that. Oh, I really like that. I mean, I think that's a good a good response. You know, that effectiveness, that realism, applying it also to yourself. If we look at our life over, you know, we don't want to encourage burnout. When we talk about people being you're the kind of person who's disposed, you know, your talent is to become a heart surgeon, make a bunch of money, and donate a good chunk of that. We don't want to push everybody to become heart surgeons and they all burn out or they're not very good at it or it that's not really not everybody's aiming at the same kind of impact. And so that psychological as you said the psychological realism or or realistic expectations about some people are just going to be harder workers than others. Some people are going to be more productive than others. Um some are are you know um more talented. Um, and when you take that into account, then kind of your limit, the upper end of your limit, because stoicism has that dichotomy of like everybody can achieve knowledge, >> and effective altruism doesn't have to make that claim that everybody can be as effective, >> right? >> Um, maybe the goal is for you to be relatively rather effective. Um, but it doesn't have to make that claim that everybody's gonna have be 100% um impactful all the time in the most effective ways. And when you remove that claim, which I think was probably just in my mind from studying so much stoism, think about stoicism so much. Yeah. They can just say, "Oh, no, it's fine. You just got to get you just got have to be pretty good compared to where you are." And then that demanding, as you said, it's still very demanding. It's not like you uh it's transformative. And anything that's transformative is demanding, but it's not. It doesn't have to be unrealistic. >> Yeah, absolutely. Perhaps another difference with stoicism and effective altruism is that I see effective altruism is really rejecting status quo bias. And I think that's was touched on by our discussion of sort of common sense ethics. And uh if you look at the the the cause selection, it's perhaps not what would immediately come to mind for most people. uh you know things like they were early and relatively early and thinking about pandemic preparedness, AI safety, um thinking about, you know, doing the most good as a matter of perhaps getting a career that pays quite a lot instead of a nonprofit type role or something of this sort. Um, Peter Singer advocated people be more public about their donations, which I think rubs people the wrong way and is a sort of upset of normal norms or can rub people the wrong way. It's upset of normal norms because he thinks that would be more effective to build a culture where people celebrate people who donate a lot and don't and donate well. Um whereas I I wouldn't say stoics have a powerful or of course stoics can say the status quo is mistaken but I think there's there sort of it's in rural ethics there's sort of a built-in reliance on tradition on norms and at least this idea that you really ought to have a good reason to upset a norm before you do so. And perhaps there is some more epistemic trust in what other people have reasoned or something like this. There's not I mean per perhaps you know I think so it would take a little bit more than just a consequentialist argument to decide oh it's a good thing for people to promote how much they give or something like this publicly and maybe would default more to the status quo. What do you think about that? Well, I mean, at first I was thinking about as a similarity with Stoicism because you got these stoic paradoxes and you got these when Stoics were known for these radical claims, but it's almost like the Stoics are radical in terms of ethics, in terms of what is good and bad and then fairly status quo when it comes to, you know, how to actually behave towards your co-workers or your, you know, your family. As you said, you have a good reason. You have to have a good reason to break these rules. And then maybe the I don't want to get too cheeky with this, but maybe the effect of altruist is the other way where they're kind of common sense about what matters, helping other people, minimizing pain, but then controversial in terms of how you go about doing that. Um, and then really which is like you've got to give me a really good reason for following the status quo, otherwise I'm just going to do, you know, what science tells me is the most effective thing. Um, yeah, it's an interesting point. It's like the well because we talked about this again. There's the what and the how. There's kind of in in in stoicism there's the discipline of desire. Um and then the discipline of action is but really like stoics the controversy of stoicism is really in that discipline of desire. Um but the discipline of action you says is is rather status quo actually. um or at least leave space for being status quo where the effective altruist is is much more radical I guess in how they go about doing it although maybe not necessarily radical in that um if they do their job hopefully these things won't be controversial in a while like they become less controversial you know like animal ethics or something becomes less controversial the more it gets discussed but yeah not not agreed with you in terms of not uh not following the status quo unless they have a good reason to do so. >> Yeah. Cool. Makes sense. >> Cool. Anything else? Any last words? >> Well, I think there's a maybe one thing that I always wrestle with is there's an effective altruist type challenge to stoicism, which is that maybe stoics should take as a one of their rules this idea of beneficence of doing the most good. and perhaps you don't adopt effective altruism as a life philosophy but you should take seriously one of you know your life projects just is doing the most good as you can so I think that's sort of a a challenge from the the effect of altruist uh should put at the feet of the stoics >> and um I do think there is uh there is something compelling about the sort of financialization type objection to effective altruism And that's uh this sort of downplaying of virtue ethics, other moral uh or other styles of thinking. And so perhaps in terms of objections, that's what I would uh to effective altruism that's what I would leave it with. >> Yeah. I mean then well to take up your first point, I think that is something you can take up in the stoic framework. You know those virtues are multifaceted. Maybe a component of one of them to emphasize is is that is that maximizing your good or or leaning more into the cosmopolitan aspect of the ethics. And I think what I'm taking away from this conversation related to that point is that idea that we probably just exist in act in we do exist in quite a significant significantly different world in terms of our access to information about what is effective and about our capacity to influence people across the world. And with those two things in mind, you know, what changes the how does that impact the actual commitments of cosmopolitanism for the Stoics? Um, probably leans more towards the beneficence. Is that the word you used? >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Probably leans more towards that than the ancient than how the ancient Stoics wrote about it. >> Cool. Thanks for putting this together. >> Great. Thanks. >> Awesome. See you. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at stoa at stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
