---
title: "How to Face Hardship | Boethius and The Consolation of Philosophy (Episode 209)"
slug: how-to-face-hardship-boethius-and-the-consolation-of-philosophy
episode_number: 209
youtube_id: BdVq0wpif7c
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BdVq0wpif7c
upload_date: 2025-11-11
duration: 48:07
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Michael Trombllay >> and I'm Caleb Monttover [music] >> and today we're talking about reviewing analyzing the consolation of philosophy by Botheus. This is a book I wanted to read for a long time but actually my first time reading it and uh really excited. It was it was it's really it's popular. It's well known. It's quite influential as we'll talk about. It's it's meant a lot to people that um have inspired me. But I have never I never got around to reading it before. So looking forward to talking about with you, Caleb. >> Yeah, likewise. It's a work I haven't read before until now as well. >> So for those that don't know um maybe what is the consolation of philosophy? Maybe you're here because you've you've read it. Maybe you're here because you want to you know know what this is all about. Why are we talking about it? So it's a book from 800 years after the founding of of stoicism. Um, so at the at the beginning of maybe this Christian medieval era that I start to know a little bit less about, I'm a bit less familiar with and it's written by Botheus and he was a Roman philosopher and Christian and um, you know, political kind of state statesman figure and he was imprisoned and executed by the Austrogothic King Theodoric and it was written during his imprisonment and it's a semi-autobiographical book. So, Botheus is obviously imprisoned. He's dealing with this threat of impending death and it's a book about him engaging in a fictional conversation with Lady Philosophy who is the embodiment of philosophy and attempts to console Botheus and dispel his false fears about death and his anger at the world. So, um, maybe a piece of philosophical, uh, semi-autobiographical, but still still a work of fiction. It's obviously not a conversation he actually had, but but a an opportunity to engage in dialogue with the embodiment of philosophy, which is a cool idea. And it falls into one of those books like um, Man's Search for Meaning by Victor Frankle, who lived through the Holocaust. um or Marcus Aurelius, his meditations, who was an emperor. I would say it's one of those books where somebody was quite advanced either philosophically or ethically encountered an incredibly um difficult situation and then we we get to see their way of reflecting on that situation or talking about that situation. And sometimes in the case of Marcus Aurelius's meditation in this book as well, it's almost them. It's almost a philosophical exercise to help them overcome it. I think Botheus is trying himself in writing this work. He's not trying to preach to others, but trying to come to terms with his own eventual death. So great great setup. >> Yeah, perhaps not for him in a different setup for the from the Stoic perspective. But it is interesting how you see figures like Botheus who was a Roman senator. Wikipedia says polymath historian. So someone was certainly a busy active man reflecting philosophically in a time of difficulty. I mean you I think it reminds me of Cicero Senica you know when they're banished from Rome banished from Roman politics they have time to reflect as well. So I think that's just an interesting and consistent uh almost personality trait to you know think it was as a natural thing to do you know when you're banished from the domain of action to >> and we we'll get into the book in a moment but it also strikes me as something maybe it's like nonironic like it's so genuine we don't see that genre anymore I guess is what I'm trying to say we don't see great people taking the time to write books about how to live. Maybe I'm just not keeping an eye out for them. I think sometimes these come in the forms of biographies of these sorts, but um it's just like it's just genuinely I have a view about how best to live and I'm going to lay it out and be, you know, put it kind of bare and stand behind it. >> Um I think that's that's a it's a fun it's a fun genre to engage with. >> No, I think so. I think I think you're right. I can't think of too many works like this. Perhaps you get the memoir. Many of those these days are ghostritten, but perhaps there's some some good um autobiographical works that come close to this, but nonetheless, they don't have none immediately come to mind that have the philosophical character like this from a contemporary figures. >> And so, um the the book itself, I the bit about its structure. It's it's made up of five books. And today, we're going to focus in particular on book two. I think book two has the most in common with stoicism and it's the one that I found um the most impressive or effective in changing my own perspective um in terms of the rhythm. So in book one, Botheus grieavves his position in prison and he's visited by Lady Philosophy. In book two, which we'll cover today, Lady Philosophy presents arguments against being angry at fate or the world even in difficult circumstances. She attempts to convince him that his anger or sadness is not justified despite this situation he's found himself in. Book three covers arguments for God as the supreme good. And then book four is on the problem of evil. Problem of evil. So if God exists and is the supreme good, why is there evil in the world? And then book five is on the existence of free will. So how free will is possible. Even if God exists and there's a providential universe, which means God has in some way dictated this to be the best of all possible worlds or at least had some sort of plan for the universe that is unfolding. How can there still be free will within that? So, it's almost um why you shouldn't why you should adopt a stoic perspective and not begrudge or be upset at your circumstances even if they're terrible. And then book three to five is an argument for God. I would say some of the philosophical complications of that, you know, if God exists, why is there evil? If God exists, how can there be free will? [snorts] So, we'll focus on book two, like I said. Yeah, absolutely. Makes sense. >> And then some quick points before we get into it. I wanted to hit on a bit bit of the historical importance of this book. So, this is it's outside of my area of historical expertise. I feel I'm confident saying that I'm an expert in stoicism, but I'm not an expert in medieval philosophy or early Christian philosophy. But this is often talked about as a bridge between Greek and Roman the Greek and Roman classical world and the Christian world. So you get in in this book you have a maybe he would consider himself a Christian but you have this person who lives philosophy as a way of life who's deeply familiar with stoicism Plato the writing of Senica Cicero um he mentions he mentions these these influences and these sources and he's put into this terrible circumstance and then he applies that philosophy as a way of life but he also is a Christian he also um believes in a Christian God, although I'm sure what Christianity looked like in 500 AD is probably a bit different than today. Um so in in in some ways, I guess at its least ambitious, this is a Christian who has integrated some stoic exercises or some Greek and Roman exercises and like methodology like even the dialogue format is kind of like a platonic dialogue. Um, I would say at its most ambitious, the most ambitious I'm willing to say is you get almost a synthesis here of Christian and Greek and Roman thinking that is is a unique combination. So that that that's where it sits. It sits right on that right on that intersection in an interesting way. Yeah, he's a Roman senator of course, but depending on the historian you speak to, some historians would say, you know, this is 523 AD, Roman Empire is over. Of course, others argue it doesn't end till a few hundred more years, but uh it's not the same it is it's not the same world of course as the world of Senica, Marcus Aurelius and so on. Uh by that point, you know, Christianity is ascendant. Uh so I think uh I think that's certainly a relevant fact. We're thinking about the sort of philosophical religious context and you're thinking of a philosophy as a way of life. you know, Christianity is the default. >> And um well, one other note of personal importance for me, I said I've never read this, but the first person I learned ancient philosophy from, Professor Stevenson, shout out to Professor Stevenson, um who's a second year philosophy class that I took, which was obviously I was a psychology major at the time, so obviously very influential for me. Um he always talked about this as his favorite book. He was like, "This is this is the peak. this is, you know, this is the peak in his view, the peak of ancient philosophy. I don't know if I agree with that. I don't like I I I prefer Epictitus. I think Marcus Aurelius is a better book. Yeah. So, let's jump into book two. For me, it was the most influential one um and the most stoic and interested in what you think about that, Caleb. So the book frames the early chapters particularly chapter 2 as attempts to calm down Botheus and Lady philosophy says you know you you're you're not ready for philosophical arguments you're not ready for the more complex stuff um until we calm you down. The quote is it's a mild paliotative to prepare him for a curative. You know we need to we need to stop the passionate response so we can have more complicated philosophical discussion. And so in book two, this is the mild paliotative. This is the reasons not to be so angry and bitter despite finding yourself falsely imprisoned and um about to be executed, which is obviously a pretty substantial position to be in. So arguments for for why you shouldn't be angry with fate or angry at the world bitter because of this kind of situation. And I identified seven arguments of the structure of this episode will go be to go through these one by one. What are they and what do we think about them? Good to jump in. >> Yeah. Well, I think it's also worth saying something about the general device which was striking to me is is that Botheus has written this as a dialogue between himself and lady philosophy. you know this impersonalization of philosophical teachings and principles and I think that's uh it's a sort of a midway between the uh standard dialogue format where you have different you know people standing in for different positions and having a single author you know representing almost as they were uh philosophy itself. So I I and I I don't know I thought that was I was I'm curious how you how you saw that general device working and do you think it worked uh and so on you know what was your response to that >> well I guess you think of it almost like contemplation of the sage right >> like it's a philosophical exercise where you embody perfection or like you know what you want to be like and then you engage in some sort of conversation or contrast with I think you're right that you don't see it that often. It's kind of an interesting format. You know, what is Lady Philosophy? Like an angel, an archangel or something. Not not God, but wise like the a sage. And so he he's conversing with a sage basically. Obviously, the irony there is that he is the sage as well because he's writing both of these characters. Um, >> but I like that. Um, I think that I think in that way it stands out as that almost like a contemplation of the sage exercise in my view. And I think it's effective. Um, I mean, I do something like this. I almost normally frame it personally as like a better version of myself or like the part of myself that knows better. I don't talk with philosophy, but it's something that I I use um, you know, just to engage in conversation with the part of me that isn't feeling isn't, you know, feeling sorry for myself or making exceptions for myself. Yeah, that's a good way to put it as a contemplation of the sage. And there's something motivating perhaps about being visited by Lady Philosophy. It's like Athena picking Odysius or something like this. [laughter] >> I better stand up straight. >> Yeah, that's right. >> Um the the part that I didn't I mean we'll get into the arguments. The part that I didn't jive with is like about maybe a quarter of the book is poetry um about the ideas that were raised and the kind of song poetry part. I honestly end up skimming that a little bit. It was like I was like give me the pros, give me the give me the propositions of the arguments. >> Yeah, I wanted to try that. I think this was learning in Latin, right? I wanted to try that in the original to see how that came across. But at least in the two translations I leave through, the poetry was not was not really working for me. And I don't have anything against poetry. I I love poetry. So >> is the bad bad poet. >> Yeah. Not to say I have a particularly good taste or anything, but uh you know those the poems didn't strike me as particularly particularly excellent. [laughter] >> Great philosophy. Okay. Poetry. >> Yeah. >> Maybe maybe it's better in Latin. Translating poetry is [laughter] hard. >> That's what I say. my the stuff that I write. Um, so what is argument number one? So he's like, uh, I I am really angry, bitter, sad. I found myself in this position. It's not fair. Um, I'm I have all these, you know, in the stoic terms, these passionate responses because I'm I'm, you know, I'm I'm mad. This is this shouldn't have happened to me. And then what are Lady Philosophy's arguments to um help him deal with deal with that sensation or that feeling? First is that if you're surprised by a change of fortune, like if you're mad at fortune because my fortune used to be good and now my fortune's bad. Lady philosophy says fortune has not changed. It was always whimsical. So you didn't really have a change of fortune. Fortune is always a thing. Sometimes you have better days, sometimes you have worse days. And this was just a wor this is a worst day or a worst time in your life. This is just the way fortune is. So fortune hasn't betrayed you. This is always how it is. The um quote here is, "You have a sharp bump and you think that Fortune's attitude towards you has changed, but you're wrong. She hasn't changed a bit. She was always whimsical and remains constant in her inconstancy. You were wrong to take her smiles seriously and to rely on them as the basis for your happiness." So, the argument is that, you know, we're shocked that things have gotten unlucky for us, but things were never destined to be good for us. Fortune changes and if we place our hopes on fortune, it will change and we shouldn't be surprised by this. >> Yeah, I think that's true and it does align nicely with the stoic focus on reducing surprise and you know seeing things as they are just sort of a reminder >> that uh you know fortune is consistently inconsistent as it were. >> Yeah. So that's the first one. Yeah. I think that that stoic idea, this is something we've been talking about recently, Caleb, but it's just right. It's like reduce the amount of times you're surprised by natural things. Don't expect don't be surprised when the fig tree produces figs. You know, don't be surprised when ignorant people do ignorant things. And it's like don't be surprised when 4chan goes bad for you because it was it was always the kind of thing that shifts back and forth. >> So yeah, I think you're right. That's like a red reducing surprise. Maybe it's like a hey, you should have done some premeditatio mealorum here and you didn't. [snorts] >> Yeah. Or it's like you you know, you've noticed this in your own life. You've certainly seen it in other people's lives, you know, as they rise and fall from power, especially given his uh political situation. So, I think that's that's also what lady philosophy is poking him about. >> Mhm. So, that's argument one. Argument two I would say is is kind of related but it's this point of um it's almost like it's illogical to place your happiness in fortune because fortune is a temporary thing. It's a changing thing. Lady philosophy says you should have recognized that it was never in your control and that the visit of the unreliable goddess is a sure sign of misery to come. You knew the mutability of fortune and you should have enured yourself against her constant threats of betrayal. If you submit your neck to her yoke, you cannot then complain about what happens to you. And I see this as, you know, Epictitus has that idea of, you know, choose choose to do the work or don't, but don't complain about doing the work if you if you choose it. And it's like you can attach yourself to things that are outside of your control that are mutable that are changeable. But if you choose to attach yourself to that and then they change, well, don't complain because you kind of you you you hitched your hitch your ride to that. You've committed to that path and you knew that path was a changeable path. >> Mhm. Yeah, I think that's right. I think uh [sighs] in a way a number of these are varants on the same theme which we'll get to which aligns nicely with stoicism this point on you you know you've put value on things outside of yourself and that's sort of the original mistake I philosophy says that you know Botheus is ill you know he has an kind of ailment and it's a ailment in how he thinks Right. And it's in particular and I think this aligns perfectly this the stoic philosophy as well as many other philosophies. You know what he values what he and and also you know what what he has knew but has forgotten is another way to put it perhaps. >> Yeah it's a good way I mean that's a platonic that's a platonic idea as well. Yeah these are all kind of mistaken ways of thinking about things that lead to your unhappiness. A third argument here. So what we had don't don't mistakenly think that fortune's changed. Fortune was always a changing thing. Don't attach your happiness to fortune or circumstance or externals and not expect them to change. That's just illogical. Third is like even if you do I'll phrase it as this. Even if you do attach yourself to externals, you can't be angry at fortune because fortune gave you everything you had. Even in its worst case scenario, it just kind of returned you back to neutral. So what Lady Philosophy says here is when nature brought you out of your mother's womb, you were naked and poor and helpless. And I accepted you and was kind to you. I pampered you and gave you more than you needed. Indeed, one could say that I spoiled you and this is why you are now so angry with me. So the idea here is that it's a very stoic idea that they get to later. You know, you have control over yourself. You don't have control over externals. So if you happen to receive any externals, that's because of the generosity of luck, fate, chance, circumstance. And so if you go back to having no externals, well that's just almost the default state that that view of like you were pampered, you got used to having things and so when the things went away, now you're angry. But you were never owed external things. There was no kind of guarantee of having good luck or fate or circumstance. That's something that you we kind of make up in our minds because we get used to things as they are. >> Yeah. Yeah, I think maybe another framing on this is like the Stoics, Botheus holds that, you know, you are in the end responsible for the way you think. You know, you're the master of yourself and you can't be forced to give that up. You know, that's something fortune cannot take away from you. So then to the extent that you decide to put your hopes on in externals on leave you know your hopes up to chance then in a way it's almost non- stoic. It's like you know but if you decide to do that then you should you know celebrate your victories but not be surprised at defeats. It's almost a kind of different attitude. Reminds me a little bit of when we talked about the Sireniacs perhaps. >> Yeah. you know, you should look, there's a kind of skill in experiencing the positives of fortune, but also the downsides. You know, if you're going to play that game, you know, understand that's the game you're you're playing and you've uh you know, be grateful for what fortune gave you and but see it see the game as it is. Don't expect it to uh everything to go your way, of course. >> Yeah, I like that point. It's like you don't have to be stoic, you know, or you know, you don't have to be Christian or platonic or adopt any of these philosophical systems that place reason as the highest good or connection with God as the highest good. You can Yeah, you can play the hedonistic game or you can play the game of pursuing things that aren't necessarily pleasure but are still external like honor and fame. But like if you're gonna be that and you're gonna complain about it, it's just kind of like ah come on. Like that doesn't that's just that's not cool. Don't do that. Which I think is a good reminder, right? It's it's that's something that I find really that's an idea of stoicism that really works well for me is that like I picked this so I can't complain. like I I I chose this undertaking with the knowledge that it might not go my way. [snorts] And so I I I don't get to, you know, be the victim here and complain about my circumstances. Now, I haven't been on death row, you know, I haven't been waiting my execution for a crime I didn't commit. So, it's a matter of scale, but the argument is consistent here. And that connects to the next point. So I I would say the the the first four arguments here handle this kind of bucket of like if you're going to be the kind of person that likes externals, at least be a good one. At least be one that doesn't complain and doesn't like misunderstand what externals are and fortune fate is. And this is the last of those arguments. So I would say the fourth argument is if you still choose to to value external goods, don't overweight your current misfortune. So, lady philosophy reminds Botheus of all the good things that have happened to him. He's had a number of honors. He's had two successful sons. He's had a number of political positions. If you decide to place your happiness in externals, then how could he say he came up short there? This only works if he overweights the present. Then, Lady Philosy raises an argument which I don't actually see we we see that much, but I thought was compelling. It's like not only that, so not only is there this argument of like, look, if you looked at your life holistically, you actually had a pretty good life. So how can you say fortune screwed you because you actually it didn't? And the other argument she raises is that actually fortune was very kind to the people you cared about. So you have a healthy father, mother, wife, you have two healthy sons. Fortune's been kind to the people you care about, which should matter to you as much or almost as much as it matters to yourself. So, how can you sit here and be mad at chance when Chance blessed you for the first, you know, was kind to you for the first 40 plus years of your life and was kind to the people around you? And I thought this was an interesting this is maybe this Marcus Aurelius talks about the expansion of time and sometimes he does that to dissolve worries but I think that that's almost happening here playing the externals game is we get so caught up in like oh this bad thing is happening to me now when um really on the whole many of us are very very um very lucky and have been um I would say the the number of people that stress bad current circumstances is much more than the number of people who have been like holistically unlucky over the course of their life. And even if you've been holistically unlucky, um have the people you cared about um been lucky, have they had have they had good chances as well? And so it's a way to kind of almost get out of this kind of cynicism or overweing the negative of of the present is is a cognitive mistake we can make. Yeah, this that's a great point and per perhaps you know we we talk about what's sort of the ultimate philosophical move which is kind of rejecting externals but and and and that's essential but there's also something valuable and just obviously practical and recognizing that hey even suppose externals really mattered you don't have things that badly off you know you're still in a pretty good spot which is true I think for for many of us uh even in uh tough situations I I think there's there's a related point lady philosophy makes here which is that just sort of setting expectations. She's you know she says something to the effect of you know everyone has bad fortune. You know the she says one who's abundant in riches is shamed by his ignoble birth. Uh you can think today of just having a kind of moral stain or dealing with a kind of shame which is certainly consistent with large amounts of wealth. There's one who's uh you know con has conspicuous for his nobility. You know he's well born but through the embarrassments of poverty would prefer to be obscure. A third he's richly endowed with both laments the loneliness of an unwed life. And then another though happily married is doomed to childlessness and nurses his wealth for a stranger to inherit. And yet another blessed with children mournfully bewails the misdeeds of a son or daughter. Wherefore it's not easy for anyone to be at a perfect peace with the circumstances of his lot. >> And I like that passage. I I like the levels to it. You know, you have someone who is rich but from a noble b birth. The person who's uh you know noble but you know he's not living up to his family name. The person who has both but you know can't find satisfaction in marriage. Another one who's happily married but you know they can't have children for whatever reason. And I think these aren't ordinary serious struggles everyone faces. So I think that's and it's useful to I think set expectations or keep that in mind when you know reflecting on how good life has been to you or something like this. So I thought that was I I I thought that was nice and concrete as well. >> Yeah. It's kind of like, you know what, you think you're going to be the only person that doesn't have something sad happen to you. Like, um, every single person suffers from something. And so, you almost need to build it into your kind of like, yeah, your your standard or your bar for what a good life constitutes. A good life is not a life where nothing bad happens to you. Um, at least not when we're talking about externals. Um, anybody who places their value in externals has bad things happen to them. And so if you're going to play that game, yeah, you've got to you've got to account for that. And the point you made, you know, I've seen some it's less philosophically robust, but there's the meme where like everybody's one guy is looking at the other guy being like, I wish I was like him, who's looking at another guy who said, I wish I was like him. And it like kind of just loops in a circle and it's like everybody just kind of his grass is greener. The other person, we we all have our um you we all have our particular brand of sorrow or suffering. Um, I've been thinking about this idea a lot that like I don't know I don't know if it's psychologically true, but this this idea that we can sometimes like Ben maintain a similar level of happiness no matter what our circumstance is. So like somebody who's miserable is going to find something to be miserable about um no matter how good fortune has been to them and somebody who's generally well disposed is going to be happy regardless of how fortune is. Um, I'm introducing some subjectivity there. Um, because obviously there's like, you know, some things are worse than others. Death or illness is is is worse than um, you know, a mild inconvenience or something like this. But everybody has their issue or their problem. And to expect yourself to be the one without it is um, yeah, kind of illogical. >> Yeah, I think so. And I think what you know what you're saying there is people are disposed or at least the way I interpret it people are disposed to handle you know different situations and some people have a different you know we might say temperament you could also say character and they're going to be able to you know be happy when it's raining while others will be you know miserable in the sunshine and I think that that's certainly true even if um even if uh externals matter a little bit I I think things like temperament, character matter even more. >> Cool. So, now we're going to get into number five, which is five, six, seven, I would say, are stoic arguments. Maybe that's a bit of, you know, I don't know if Botheian is stoic compatible arguments. I don't know if Botheus is stoic. I mean, he's certainly not doesn't think of himself as one. He's not. We actually haven't talked about this, but he does castigate the Stoics and he says they corrupted philosophy. Basically, >> I I jumped over that part. I was like, "No, no, put my fingers in my ears." And I was like, [laughter] >> I ripped the page out and I burnt it. >> Yeah. Okay. I'm interested in what he says there because I find it so stoic. I find it and now I'm like, "Oh, no." I I'm like >> now I just see everything as stoic because here's this guy who's who's I know he's not stoic. he's supposed to be Christian or is Christian and apparently um like Platonic or um has some neoplatanism influence but everything he says I'm like you could you could if you told me we found the old writings of Chrysopus or Zeno and this was the writings I'd be like that's fine that all adds up. So here are some stoic compatible arguments I would say about why you shouldn't be sad if you find yourself imprisoned and awaiting death. So number five is fortune cannot affect the thing most important to us which is ourselves. The quote here is why do men look outside themselves for happiness when surely it is to be found inside. Is there anything more precious to you than yourself? No certainly not. But if you are in possession of yourself then you have that which you don't want to lose and which fortune can't take away from you. For me this is just a almost a verbatim Epictitan argument. You could find this in Epictitus. Fortune can only harm externals but not internals. Happiness comes from internals from ourselves from our character or virtue. And you ought you necessarily have possession of it. It necessarily can't be destroyed by other people or harmed by other people. It necessarily is in your control. So you already have everything you want. That's the that is like the that is stoic I guess happiness in a nutshell is realizing that realizing that you already have what you need to be happy right now. And that's this that's this point here is that okay if you're going to play the external arguments one through four if you're going to play the external game at least play it well. Argument five why are you even playing the external game? Shouldn't you just be thinking about what what matters which is you and you're still you? >> Yep. Yep. Yeah. I think this is, as you say, this is could be rip from Epitus. I think it's uh a perfect statement of that idea. And I think um there's another there's another place where he has Lady Philosophy say, you know, you're not this is paraphrasing, but you're not banished. you know, you're wailing, your banishment, your imprisonment, but no one has that lawful power over you. You know, no one can you the way you're using that term of obviously they can banish you in sort of a matter of fact or put you in prison, but that's it. You know, that's not all that you're wailing about. >> You you know, it's this Epictitus idea. you're wailing because you believe something bad has happened to you and that's core to imprisonment. But no, no, no one has that power over you. And I think that's uh a perfectly stoic idea. And it's I think another I suppose we've uh just just talking through this I think you get to see someone in just in this piece who's versed with philosophy but uh you know being in prison and facing your upcoming death is no small matter. It's difficult thing to to tackle. So you get to see him work work through it in a way and you I I sort of imagine him you know writing these words contemplating them and experiencing a sense of relief tranquility >> and then it returns or something like this you know and that's why he has to keep on writing uh because he's still facing a situation and he's hasn't perhaps hasn't completely internalized the teachings of of lady philosophy. I mean [snorts] there there's certainly increasing in philosophical complexity. >> Yeah, it was a I I I I I read it that way as a personal exercise as a as a journal to himself as as a way to, you know, put the reflect on your principles. Keep them on hand as Epictitus said, digest them. And he's doing this as an exercise to do that to help him go through this difficult test. Um, agree. And and now we're flipping over from the kind of common sense arguments or the common sense view which is this external oriented view to more of the Christian philosophical view of like well actually maybe good is contained inside yourself. It's not about externals. >> Yeah, that's another good way to put it is I think this maps onto the the first or one of the first bits we shared from lady philosophy which is like you're not ready for the full course yet, right? you [snorts] need something uh a little softer before we go to the more difficult philosophical topics and you can see that movement in this book and then also I think the later ones as well. >> Mhm. So that was number five which is like fortune can't affect the thing most important to us which is ourselves. Again that stoic view epictitus you can chain my leg but not even you know god himself can chain my thoughts or control my thoughts. Number six is reinforcement of this argument. It's that external riches aren't valuable anyway. So quote here from lady philosophy. My view is that nothing is good that is harmful to him who owns it. But riches have very often harmed those who possess them. So there you are with your stuff and you find yourself fearful about being waylaid or even murdered for your possessions. I just like so so stoic, Caleb. um you know you you're upset that you've lost externals because you think they're good but good things can't harm you. That's a stoic argument. Um so but externals harm us all the time. You can be you can be rich and you can sit around being um you know fearful about going broke, fearful about people betraying you. You think about the you know the extremely rich people that are like do I even have friends? Can I even trust the people around me? Are they just after me for my money? Um, this this idea we become more anxious the more we have. There's another example which doesn't quite land the same, but it talks about your slaves lying to you. Like, oh, you miss your slaves, but don't your slaves just lie to you? [laughter] They're not like they're not very they're not honest or good slaves anyway. Um, yeah. Um, >> you can rephrase to your you you know you don't have chat GBT anymore. But doesn't it hallucinate sometimes? >> Yeah, exactly. Something like that, right? Like you you miss these luxuries, but what did you enjoy? Like were they were they um didn't you complain about them when you had them kind of thing. Um yeah and this is this is a stoic point and one of the most compelling stoic points for why we should focus on virtue is that good things are necessarily good. So we know externals can't be good because they often harm us. Focusing on riches here which is an easier example. I think that's something that most people would agree is um more indifferent than something like health or something. But this idea that you know if these are things that harm people and make them unhappy they can't be good. And so, you know, let's not stress too much about losing them. [clears throat] >> Yeah. Yeah. I think that's well put. >> And [clears throat] then >> I I don't know how much does it does it always work as an argument though? You know, you're like, "Yeah, you miss your wife, but didn't she used to nag you all the time?" >> [laughter] >> Well, the Stoics would say the Stoics would say that true friendship >> um or like companionship is a is like above and beyond other externals. Um I I don't know the the nagging example is a is a silly one. I mean the slave lying example I thought was was very funny. >> Um >> I mean it it's it's a fundamental stoke position. Whether or not I agree with it, I mean, it seems to me that you could have a counterargument that like things can be circumstantially good and it's like good to have them in that circumstance and like I liked having my friends. I friends can sometimes be terrible. Like I liked my wife. Your your partner or wife or husband can sometimes be abusive, but like my wife wasn't that and that was good. Um, and so I'm sad to have lost it. The stoic argument here is is the preferred and different one, right? which is like, yeah, you've lost something you'd prefer to have. >> Yeah. >> You're not you're not necessarily unhappy. >> Um, Botheus isn't going to use that exact language. Um, but yeah, that would be the stoic view. >> Yeah, I think I think that's right. I think Botheus was going to say something similar to that. There is, I suppose, a different view, which is like, you know, these thing valuable things often do harm you or they involve sacrifice, they involve suffering. uh which is per perhaps slightly different but ends up in the same probably really effectively the same place as the stoics and >> Botheists. [sighs and gasps] And so we get then to number seven last argument. External awards or honors are not valuable anyway. And so the quote here is if those offices and their powers had anything inherently good in them they would never be possessed by wicked men. For in their nature opposites do not attract For in nature opposites do not attract one another. And since there can be no doubt that offices are often held by evil men, then it follows that they are not in themselves good. And so I see this as the same argument as number six. It's just shifting the view to like honors and awards. Oh, I miss my money. Well, money, you know, money is not a good thing because sometimes it's bad to have money. I miss being, you know, well-liked in my community and in these in these influential political positions. Ah, well, those aren't good either because if they were good things, they wouldn't be so often filled with terrible people. The office is not an honor. Lady philosophy says, I really like this idea. The office itself is not an honor, but it's an opportunity to in display your honor or, you know, act well. But just because you've lost that opportunity, you haven't lost that part of your character. Um, and so I think it's the same argument. We're just shifting the topic. What I think is interesting here when we were we were kind of giving that sequential developmental view. And in Plato's Republic, he talks about there's three kinds of people. There's the people who care about external things. They care about money and pleasure. There's the people who care about honor. And then there's the people who care about reason and philosophy. And I I'm almost reading this as as them going through order through going in order and saying, "Well, well, you shouldn't care about pleasure and rich richness, riches that can harm you. You shouldn't care about honors or rewards either. Those aren't good." And that just leaves us with the last thing, which is reason in this case, your relationship with God, and that is the actual good, and that's left untouched. So, I see I see it in that kind of sequential way that Ptheus is going through. >> Yeah, I think that's that's that's exactly right. to sort of a a structured argument for you know seeing reminding yourself of what you know the purpose of or Botheus reminding himself you know of what the purpose of his life is and then reframing his circumstance with that purpose in mind seeing it a new and uh you know when lady philosophy is first castating him she says you know look you've forgotten you've forgotten who you are in so many hurts, you know, you you've forgotten your own nature and instead become ill. Again, I think a useful useful metaphor. Then perhaps we should spend another episode on on book three because I maybe that that's where Botheus starts to depart some from the Stoics where I think you know so you have an so far is very stoic but of course in book three there's idea that it's you could read this in a stoic way of course but you know the ultimate good is uh related to God of course in the Christian sense. So uh I think perhaps that's something we we should dive into. But I think so far the general approach would be as a therapeutic one something that stoics maybe even uh other uh Greek philosophers would have been very congenial to. >> Yeah. It's like if we I'm happy let's do let's do a book 31. But it's like you you you argue for why the good is internal or at least accessible to you regardless of circumstance. But then you still haven't defined exactly what the good is. And then as you said it comes down to your relationship with nature or God. And nature and God for Botheus is going to look a bit different than nature and God for the stoics. But but we we are still ending up at that same place of an internal good that's not circumstantially dependent. Yeah. So, therapy, I think you're exactly right. That's the kind of therapy of like, oh, okay, I've calmed down. Okay, now explain to me how to live well. Uh, and then book three, we get that. And then book four and five is like, well, you know, if God exists, why is there evil? Well, if if if you're right, how can I still have free will? Kind of resolves these kind of issues. >> So, I'll summarize those one more one more time and then um interested if you have any any final thoughts. So we get those seven arguments for why we shouldn't grieve over a change in our fortune. Number one was that fortune hasn't changed. It was always whimsical. Like fortune has been the same thing. It always was, which is a thing that changes. Second is that if you if you place your if you place your happiness and fortune, you need to be prepared for change because it is a thing that changes. Number three was that fortune gave you everything you had. So you can't be upset when it takes it away. like be grateful. Number four is that if you choose to live judge to judge your life by externals to live based on um achieving external things don't overweight your current misfortune. Um most of us looked at when we look at our lives over the course of our lives we have a lot of good things like a net positive of good things and even if we don't we can think about things that have happened to our family or the ones that we care about that we're lucky for then we get um argument number five which is that fortune this is when we move away from these arguments about if you're going to if you're going to focus on external things at least do it the right way and we say, well, maybe we actually shouldn't focus on external things because five, fortune can't affect the thing most important to our to us, which is ourselves. Everybody loves ourselves most of all. And external riches can't be good because um money stuff often harms us, makes us more anxious, and external awards and honors can't be good because lots of terrible people have these things. And we we we want to say that terrible people there's this there's a very quick argument there that terrible people can't have good things, can't have good lives. Maybe we maybe we disagree with that argument, but but that's a point there. And I I like this other argument that, you know, there's nothing good about about having power. Power is just an opportunity to display our character or do good things with the good character. >> Yeah. And you have that opportunity regardless of whether you're in power. >> Yeah. >> Or not. Just a change of just a change of circumstance. Yeah, I like that one as well. >> Cool. Any any thoughts on Botheus? How would you how was the how would you review it? How was the book reading experience? >> I think it's a excellent Well, I would say I think it's an excellent book and maybe one sign of that is I felt like I wanted is I think I need to reread it. I don't think that about many books I read, but it is this is something I want to return to. So, I don't know if you have that sense as well, but I had I while reading it, I pulled out many uh things to think about, but I had the sense that I didn't pull out enough or perhaps my perspective on the work could change in a few years. So, I think that's um really a fairly high recommendation as far as books go. >> Yeah, I agree with that. I just uh for me the thing that stuck out the most is you don't it's like watching a really skilled athlete practice their craft in the at the peak of their game. It's like what does philosophy have to offer us? Well, let's see. Let's take this philosopher and let's see them confront uh a terrible circumstance and let's see how well they're able to do it. And it's uh that historical context to me really really makes it just seeing that person put into practice, work through the arguments, presumably feeling that sense of relief you were saying or that sense of assurance as they work through it. Um that to me was probably the most inspirational part. I think philosophically it wasn't as maybe novel as I was expecting um or challenging, but I think that's the appeal to it is that it's accessible and that it's seeing somebody, you know, put it into practice that really makes really makes it stand out to me. >> Awesome. Well, thanks for putting this together. >> Cool. Thanks, K. >> Peace. Thanks for listening to Sto Conversations. If [music] you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at Stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
