---
title: "How to Resist Pressure (Episode 210)"
slug: how-to-resist-pressure
episode_number: 210
youtube_id: btmXWdrr574
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btmXWdrr574
upload_date: 2025-11-18
duration: 47:15
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to STOA conversations. [music] My name is Caleb Monttoveros and I'm Michael Trombbley and today we're going to be talking about resisting pressure. It's a work by Plutarch and it's all about how not to cave, how not to be a pushover and uh sort of cultivating the character to sort of strike the balance between being someone who is too compliant, too agreeable, uh versus someone who's maybe uh too rigid, doesn't care enough about what others think or doesn't take into account their uh desires and and makes mistakes. So, it's it's really an interesting work, I think, and we're going to cover some items of philosophical interest, but it's a philos it's a practical work, I would say. You know, he does give rules really for resisting pressure. So we'll go into you know what he thinks is at the heart of the matter and then discuss a number of his examples and end with 10 reflections on uh how to resist pressure. So that's that's what that's the plan. >> Yeah. Great. I mean this was my first time reading Plutarch. You recommended this Caleb and I really enjoyed it. I mean I've read some of his excerpts before because he talks about the Stoics, one of our sources on the Stoics. Um but reading his I guess like his philosophy and his approach to philosophy really enjoyed it. Looking forward to talking about it with you. I think two reasons I enjoyed this is one I am I think I am agreeable an agreeable person like I think um I I'm not a naturally disagreeable person. So, I think if I if I, you know, if I'm trying to to improve my character, this is something that I could do better, which is like I I know how to I know what's right in a situation and I'm not going to cave to pressure or I'm not going to I'm going to just say what I think and I'm not going to try to, you know, care as much about what other people feel if they're if they're wrong in the matter. Um, that's something that I want to develop and this is this is helpful for that. The other thing I was thinking about reading this, we we did a series on the four virtues and I was originally critical um of the virtues because you know you take something like courage and it's like well how does that help me? I know I'm supposed to be courageous. What am I supposed to do now? But one thing we got out of that series was that when you break them down into smaller parts they actually become really actionable almost like training like oh I'm going to focus on this specific subvert right now. And I felt this was kind of the same way. It was nice to reflect on not just oh you should be we spend so much time in stois talking about you should be virtuous and it's like it's nice to just spend I'm just going to tell you spend some time thinking specifically about you know not being a pushover not caving to pressure like that one specific aspect of your character how good are you there when do you fall short and what are some ways to improve and that's what this piece did a good job of and so looking forward to talking about with you >> fantastic yeah I think blueark's good at drilling into it's almost a subvert of sorts. >> Mhm. >> And uh he does he does a good job talking through examples take a mix of taking from his own life thought experiments and also appealing to examples in Greco Roman history. So I think it's it's a good mix uh to get uh the mix of sort of someone who's grounded in practical examples, history and and philosophy as well. >> Um so just just some quick words on Plutarch. uh he lived from 45 to 120 CE. He was a platonist philosopher, not a stoic I should say. Actually has some works criticizing the stoics. He's most well known for writing parallel lives which is a uh a set of you could think of it almost as moral biographies that paired Greek and Roman figures together and rated them on their virtue and vices. So, it's uh it's a very interesting work. I I've we've spoken about this before on the podcast or at least I've spoken to a fellow named Alex Petcast who has a podcast called The Cost of Glory where he covers Plutarch parallel lives in depth. So, I definitely recommend that work. I'm sure we'll cover some pieces from Plutarch from that book in the future as well, but I recommend that work specifically and uh Alex's podcast in particular if you want to dive into that. Um but yeah, so let's talk about I suppose what he sees as sort of the vice that he's aiming to combat and then uh dive into some of his examples. Um so at the very beginning he contrasts the shameless person with the pushover and he says you know this shameless person is someone who's untroubled by making a mistake whereas the pushover is someone who's highly sensitive to even the appearance of a shameful action. And this is a direct quote. It's coming from Michael Fontaine's uh translation which is uh collected in how to have willpower. And uh it's this trait of sensitivity, hyper sensitivity, oversensitivity to making a mistake that he sort of sees at as being at the root of being a pushover. It's an oversensitivity to shame. And on one hand, you know, you shouldn't totally ignore shame. You know, we we have some aspects. Uh we had an episode on self-respect. And uh I I don't think, you know, you shouldn't make the mistake of not having any self-respect or failing to judge yourself when you make mistakes. Um and on the other side, he also you shouldn't be too sensitive to thinking, "Oh, I made a mistake." Or, "Oh, I don't want to step on someone else's toes." uh uh or I don't want to you know do wrong to this person and these are taken alone legitimate concerns perhaps but if you're hyper sensitive to that you will be a pushover in short the translation I have uh Michael Fontaine leaves this term dysopia which is an oversensitivity to shame untransated which I think is useful because perhaps there's not a good uh specific word for it in in English, but this is what he sees as being at the root of the vice of, you know, being a pushover essentially of caving. >> I mean, I I like that way of putting it as the oversensitivity to shame. I mean, it strikes me as very riskatilian kind of golden mean. It's just like be ashamed about the things that deserve shame. But, you know, if you stand up for yourself or if you say how you feel or if you tell someone no and then you start to feel embarrassed because that makes them unhappy or because they're they're disappointed in you or something like this, that's like an inappropriate shame. That's not actually deserving of shame. And so, that's that's the oversensitivity. It's like it's like feeling it when it's not appropriate versus the shameless person who doesn't feel it when it is appropriate. Um which is yeah it seems very arisatilian about you're going you're going the wrong way either side and this is about feeling too much shame. Mhm. There's a nice example he gives and he's really mindful of the sort of balance I think you know noting Aristotle's I think perfectly appropriate the sort of balance between uh not being shameless versus hyper sensitivity and he gives a nice example of a therapist is ridding a teenage soul of malice. Um, you know, this this teenager is developing some vice perhaps. And when he applies a pointed remark to a delicate and tender part of the soul, though, such as the part that causes feelings of awkwardness and turns us into pushovers, he's careful not to accidentally cut all sense of shame out along with it. I I like this because it's sort of, you know, you imagine therapist, coach, what have you. they're, you know, they're they're working with someone and they're maybe they they're making a remark like you're better than this or something like this and you're trying to appeal to the person's sense of shame, self-respect to motivate them to act better, but at the same time, you know, he says you you need to be careful not to accidentally cut out all sense of shame uh along with it because I I know many listeners are familiar with if you criticize someone too much, then it's just going to be rational for them to double down, not feel any shame. So there's there's sort of a balance there when you're dealing with others and uh when you're dealing with yourself. >> Yeah. It makes me also think of like the radical acceptance or toxic positivity or this idea of, you know, whatever you like is fine. Whoever you are is great. Um you just need to love yourself. And that's that kind of maybe that's not what the that example is meaning, but I see that also as like cutting out this idea of shame where it's like, you know, you don't want the person hating themselves and having being too insecure, but also you don't want it to be like everything you do is beautiful and you're special and there's nothing wrong with you because that's just not realistic or accurate either. Um, shame has that important, you hit on that the start of conversation, it has that important stoic, it's an important stoic tool for behavioral improvement. Um, you know, I think of shame, at least in Epictitus's way of putting that, it's that gap between who you are and who you could be or who you know you should be. Um, and that's natural to feel because the stoics think we have some sort of natural, you know, there there is a kind of natural way we should be. We should be rational. we should be kind to others. Um, we should be seeking the truth. And when you fall short of that target, it's it's natural or healthy to feel that shame. So, that's what it makes me think of when it's like cutting out, you don't want to just throw out the baby with the bathwater there. >> Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. He cites a line from Homer, shame which does men both great harm and great help. So, I think that's sort of pointing at this idea. Yeah. And you also know too, you know, you can be more specific about different types of shame, distinguishing a healthy sense of shame. I think I like to think of that as self-respect from dystopia or this unhealthy sense of shame. >> But, you know, you can also think of the level, you know, shame. Well, that's something that can be useful uh but also can be a great harm. >> Yeah, it's interesting there with the you think of it as self-respect because that's a very arisatilian thing to do is like you call every level something different. It's not like uh you know it's not like shame shameless shameful. The middle state state kind of has its own term which can be helpful for conceptually differentiating it. So I like self-respect u as an idea. But I think of when I think of this I think of even just like a conscience that that like folk psychology idea of just like oh I kind of like feel embarrassed that I did that that crappy thing that I didn't have to do. And it's like uh so for me when I think of shameless it's like you don't have a conscience. You're just like oh I don't I'm not holding myself to any sort of standard. Whatever I do becomes the standard of goodness. >> And then this dysopia is just this kind of constant um well I don't know it's it's maybe not even not even wallowing. It's like caving early because you don't want the risk of wallowing or caving early because you don't want you're so sensitive to shame you're not feeling it too much. You're trying to avoid the situation and so you're being a pushover. You're trying to avoid the conflict. Um so Plutarch we should talk about some examples and as as I said earlier he gives some great sort of mythical examples some historical ones and then he moves on to you know how are ways that you can cultivate a disposition to resist pressure and that's where he you know dives into some of the ones uh you know examples we face in our day-to-day lives but I do like um his uh mythical and historical examples as well about it really touches on two episodes we've talked about before but not too often but we've touched on them each for one episode he talks about Creon and Media so we have an episode on Senica's version of media and there's a specific part in that play where Kan is going to exile media send her away and media asks you know for more time before she is immediately banished from the city and Kran essentially caves in. You know, it's the sort of reasons, you know, what's a I think it's an additional day or something of this sort. Um, and that is a mistake. You know, Plutarch's line on this is Yeah, Plutarch's line on this is nice. He says, "He gave sage advice to others but succumbed to pressure himself. And by granting her requests for a day's reprieve, he destroyed his world. And uh yeah, for those who are unfamiliar, Armed Media goes on to commit horrendous deeds towards her children and uh murders Korean's daughter. That's uh you know, it's clearly it was clearly a mistake even though you can see how someone might reason to sort of justify that decision. You know, it's a difficult decision to be to exile Medadia perhaps. Uh you can see cases where maybe you want to take off the band-aid a little bit more slowly and that's what Creon is convinced to do, but it turns out uh terribly. Yeah. So, is this I I think that's a great example. Is this just like avoiding awkward conversations or is there a bit more nuance to it? Like it's almost like because when I think of avoiding awkward conversations I guess I'm trying to think of what's the because we all we all have that experience, you know, you're you're I mean you and I both do jiu-jitsu and there's kind of like the guy that smells and you don't want to tell the guy that he smells even though you probably should and you just like you're just kind of avoiding um you're avoiding that conflict. Um, is is it is it just is it that is it just like being uncomfortable with doing what's right because it's going to make someone else sad or what? Yeah, what would be the more technical it has to do with shame, but what would be the kind of more technical way of thinking about it on an interaction by interaction basis? >> Yeah, that's a great question. So I suppose the way I see it is it does have to do with at the first level conflict avoidance or you know not wanting to uh say something that makes someone unnecessarily feel bad or what have you. And I think what Plutarch wants to say is essentially you're sensitive to violating a norm. Maybe in Kran's case you know treating media unfairly. you don't want to be unfair and perhaps also you don't want to be seen as someone who >> uh acts uh in an unjust manner. So I think it's both of those uh factors matter you know how other people see you and also are you following the right norms and then it becomes perhaps a a preoccupation and and turns to shame because you uh will will think worse of yourself if in fact you do violate these norms. you have a preoccupation on perhaps on how other people see you as someone who upholds uh justice in the case of Creon is a fair ruler and uh to the while ignoring and this is perhaps where these points about a balance comes in some other arisatilian points about the other virtues while ignoring other matters >> that are crucial in the situation at hand you know it becomes a preoccupation instead of just something that's you know decision relevant one factor among many. >> Ah that makes sense. Okay. Yeah. So there's there's a bunch of different things that you're balancing and if violating the social norm becomes the number one thing that overrides the other considerations. Um, I think of this in terms of, you know, if somebody's making you uncomfortable, um, at a party and you're not willing to be like, "Hey, like stop talking to me or like leave me alone or stop flirting with me." And it's like you just you're afraid, I guess you're like afraid of making a scene almost that kind of you don't want to be like uh embarrassed that way. I I was also thinking of um the example in the horror movies. I think there's there's this trope in horror movies where, you know, the the somebody's like invading your space, but you're not really willing to tell them to leave or go away or like, you know, why didn't they just why didn't they just uh leave the situation, but there's this like kind of norm or pressure to stay and not to make a big deal and then it ends up with everybody getting killed. And that's kind of this vice in practice. I think that's a fun example if it if it tracks. >> Yeah, totally. I think that's a great example. The other examples Plutarch Plutarch notes from historical cases are the example of Dion and Calipus. We talked about Dion when he had the episode on Plato. He's a was a student of Plato's arrival of um Dionius of Syracuse. But to cut a a long story short, he didn't take protective measures against Calipus. They're both students of Plato, both friends of Plato, but uh political rivals as well. And but Plutarch says, you know, Dion didn't want to be seen as, you know, protecting himself, communicating that he didn't trust Calipus. And as such, he shouldn't have trusted Calipus because, uh, you know, he was assassinated. Um, and there's a he also lists the example, you don't need to go into it too long, but there's so many examples of of his in history of, you know, figures getting invited to a dinner. They don't want to be seen as rude. They go to the dinner and perhaps they don't want to, again related to this Dion and Columbus example, they don't want to be seen as uh snubbing their host in any way or communicating they don't trust their host so they don't go with the uh right security detail that they should and then they are uh murdered and you know I think that's a extreme example but the you're bringing that's really the same example as your party really you know not wanting to seem rude at the party you know getting that invitation and uh uh you know maybe or stay you know people I'm thinking of classic a classic case of someone trying to convince you to stay out later than you should or something you know what's the big deal you really >> yeah you don't want to seem lame you don't want to seem >> exactly >> I'm thinking of the red wedding in Game of Thrones is is one of these um the murdered at dinner situations um and I'm reading the Odyssey right now and this is how Agamemnon dies he gets um invited for dinner and then and then killed um if I'm remembering properly um which is another famous Greek trope probably because it happened quite a bit where they're pressuring you with social norms so you know you don't bring uh weapons bodyguards as you were saying and then uh you get taken advantage of >> and I think this is where the point about balance or preoccupation is also so important because sometimes you shouldn't you know bring that extra security detail right so sometimes it is a good idea to trust the other person and uh but you know Plutarch's point is that the >> you don't want to cave into pressure you don't want to make that decision for the wrong reasons >> um like part of it's not caving to peer pressure this is where I just want to emphasize this is where the balance is really important because one way you could say is just you could just say it's not caving to peer pressure. It's just doing what you think is right in every situation. And um Plutarch is saying no no social convention matters. We should listen to social convention. We should pay attention to social convention. To insult somebody without a good reason is not what a good person is like. It's just a it's that it's that overemphasis, that preoccupation with not upsetting anybody, with not making a scene, with not causing conflict in a way that breaks a norm that you know when the danger, the risk, the the compromise of your values should outweigh the social phaua and you still cho choose not to make the social phawa. That that's the that's the error. Not being uh attuned to social norms. Plutarch's still advoc advocating for that. It's just overemphasizing that. Um, I imagine this like the kind of I mean you you can imagine this vice very sympathetically when you think of yourself and the situations you felt pressured to do things and kind of forgive yourself. But maybe you can also imagine it in the kind of socialite or you know the person who's always putting that kind of social convention at at the at the front of of um what they do, how they act, who they associate with. And you know the they end up associating with bad people or bad things happen in their presence and it's like yeah you've kind of got a distorted perception of priorities in that case. >> Absolutely. So then the question arises you know how do you become someone who doesn't cave into pressure and here blue tark gives us um some advice and this advice starts with starting small you know he says we can start as people practicing anything do with little incidents that aren't too hard to face and he gives a number of examples it's interesting how um for the most part modern these examples could be things like rejecting social drinking either entirely or perhaps you know not having too much you setting a limit for how much you are going to drink even when other people you know they're just about to toast just have that other round what have you. He also lists not gambling while drinking which is perhaps a general rule a good rule in general uh regardless of concerns about dystopia. Um and then also suggests not suffering fools in sort of ordinary situations sort of you know there's always there's definitely going to be a balance here but um not being preoccupied with seeming nice essentially but knowing you know if it's your role in a particular situation to you know perhaps get get some outcome um at work or something like that. That's what you're focused on. And of course, reading others well, but you know, not wasting time or letting others make mistakes when you're simply, you know, preoccupied with perhaps not seeming like someone who is, you know, not fun to be around or something like this, something that's irrelevant to the role at hand. >> Yeah, I mean, I agree with you that those are really contemporary examples. The other thing that they make me think is that I just like respect these people. It's like an interesting thing. I mean, I see this kind of middle ground quality. Um, the people who don't, you know, who who could be respectfully like, "No, I'm just not drinking like thank you." Um, and can kind of like respectfully stand up for themselves. It's just something that I really admire. Um, the other thing I thought about these is it reminds me so much of Epictitus who talks about when you're working on, you know, dealing with desire, you you start small, the same kind of thing. And it just um well it reminds me sometimes we so I think sometimes we think about the cultivation of virtue as some sort of I don't know ethereal philosophical like a skill like it exists in some sort of higher plane. And the point here is just very similar of like you know you go for short runs you do that then you go for medium length runs then you go for longer runs. It's just back to the craft analogy, like you just lift the weight that you can safely lift and then you start lifting a bit more. And so I I I I love when the philosophers are just like, yeah, you just just do just do it in simple easy situations and it will get better. You'll get better at it and you'll be able to do it in harder situations. I just I I love that reminder and insight even from Plutarch. >> Yeah, I think it's a great strategy. He also mentions that that uh another way one could practice is by not applauding bad performances and uh you think about someone who compliments everything they have and maybe I think there's can be a kind of positivity in that but sometimes those compliments are empty right and maybe if if you are that kind of person maybe you don't need to do that a lot of time and that that would be one way to practice >> well this was another thing I was thinking about was like feedback I don't know my my work talks a lot about feedback back and the importance of giving honest constructive feedback and it's almost like I think there's this social convention around not criticizing people but then giving good feedback is is exactly requires criticism and so that's when we're that's when you're talking about competing interests because you have that interest of like social convention but then you have that person's interest of wanting to get better or improving and it's like if you if you allow the social convention that uncomfortable like you're going harm the other person because you don't you feel uncomfortable criticizing them. It's a great example of um uh it's a great example of of this dystopia of like um you're harming them, you're harming yourself because you're just uncomfortable with this idea that um you're breaking this convention that you've been um habituated to. >> Yeah, that's a good example. Um and it also points to you know there's a skill in giving good feedback. You know Plutarch in a number of cases mentions that you need to have social tact. It's not you know you can't depending on the situation of course but you it's uh you could say the same thing well or you can say it poorly. And you know, Blut notes that often it's useful to use humor or, you know, treat people who are maybe higher status with you, higher status than you by appealing to their guilt in some cases, you know, or or self-conception is maybe a better way to put it. You know, I I thought you were better than this or something of that sort. Maybe using humor more with people who are uh lower status than you is something he says. He has a nice example where you know a cynic is asking some king for money and he asks him for $50 and the king says you know that's not a gift the kings grant. It's too small. And then the man says you know the cynic says synic philosopher says give me 250k. and the king responds, you know, that's not a gift that cynics receive. Which is a which is nice. It's a nice line, nice quip. Um, I don't know if you ever listen to the comedian Bill Burr, but he has a story where he talks about meeting the uh Leonardo DiCaprio and uh it's it's a short story where he is introduced to Leonardo by a friend and you know the friend says something like at some event and Le uh you know this is Bill Burr the comic and you know Leonardo just responded with I'm familiar with his work and Bill Burr says something like you know at that moment And he at once validated me, communicated respect in the way he said it, and also communicated that he had no interest in talking with me [laughter] at that time. And I recognized that and we moved on and I walked away feeling great. Uh, and he's like, you know, it's just some sort of verbal jiu-jitsu, if you will. You know, being able to communicate uh something like that just in the manner of your speech without being uh, you know, a complete completely rude. Um, you know, effectively Leonardo blew him off but did it in a attackful way. So I think you know that that's something that Plutarch harps on in a number of his examples is you know just because you are resisting the pressure others are applying on you doesn't mean it's you know appropriate to respond in a in a sort of socially >> uh socially unaware type way. Well, I think that's a great example and I think of what a skill it's a skill that uh crosses all kinds of I don't know levels of wealth or power like the this skill from a relatively junior less senior person in in a company or in a social group. There's there's different kinds of pressure that and social convention that gets placed on you and that's when you have to, you know, reject social drinking or say no to peer pressure and say, I'm going to still conform to this group. I'm still going to want to be a part of it, but I'm not going to like compromise myself. Um, that that's one way of doing that. That's a skill. And then I was thinking about how much you must have to get good at this as a celebrity when you're giving that >> Leo DiCaprio story. If you're Marcus Aurelius, you've got to be an expert at people are asking you for things all the time. um they're expecting things of you and you've got to you would either you would become so cynical and angry about social interaction or you would just become super good at this of like I'm going to and that was that I guess that jiu-jitsu part is like you're not he's not really breaking social convention because he's almost like he's breaking social convention in one way where he's not like oh my god Bill so nice to meet you wow amazing which is like the dinner party invit invit like dinner party introduction convention but he's still socially passing. It's like that. It's like that that middle ground about like I'm not I don't want to do that, so I'm not going to do it. But I'm going to figure out a social out of this situation that doesn't make people uncomfortable. >> Another point here too, I think, is that if you as you get better at this skill, it becomes easier to practice. So I think that's um uh something to keep in mind. If you are hyp hyper sensitive then you can work on if you're hyper sensitive to violating social norms you know you can work on violating so these sorts of social nor norms a little bit more you know changing your attitude towards that you know seeing it as not just harming yourself but harming others you know failing to give good feedback if that's a good example but also you can work on you know giving feedback without in an excellent way and then I think you you have less of a concern concern about >> Yeah. >> the uh you know the vi violation of social norms. >> Yeah, that's a good point. It's harder the worse you are at it. Um totally >> a bit of a puzzle. So towards the end uh in my translation at any rate, Michael Fontaine lifts lists 10 reflections. Maybe useful to go go through the end go through each of these. We've touched on some of these already, but you know, Plutarch notes that when it comes to resisting pressure, we should keep these things in mind. First, you know, caving exacerbates problems. It's sort of a classic case of caving is easier now, but of course becomes evidently the a mistake later on. And I think all all our examples capture that. We all have examples from our own life that uh communicate that. Second point, silence is often an effective response. You know, if you especially in certain cases where you might be wary to respond or not exactly know how to respond, sometimes silence silence is an option. Silence is fine. >> I think that caving exacerbates problems one is the key one because what's the difference between a respecting social convention and caving to social convention? I think it's when you've you've chosen not the best option like you've made a mistake. And so I love that idea. Like what's the idea? What's the difference between going along with norms and caving? If it got if things got worse and you probably if you realized things were going to get worse is probably another piece to it, then you caved. You know, if you realized it wasn't the right thing to do and you did it anyway, that's caving. So I think that's a that's a really important one. Yeah, I think so. And the silence one is most useful perhaps when you're when you're in more of a bullying type situation. You know, someone's really trying to pressure you to do something and uh maybe you know walking away silence. I think that's when it it's most useful. In other cases, he notes quote famous sayings and quips [snorts] to ease the uh delivery of your no as it were. You know, that can work. I think it ties in general to the uh you know being being humorous, being having tacted. >> Yeah. Well, it's the it's the $50 isn't enough for a king to give and $250 is too much for a cynic to ask for. It's a just a funny way of saying no, right? Um, we talk about that Dioynes line where um um where Alexander the Great is like, "Is there anything I can do for you?" And Dyn says, "Yeah, you can step aside because you're blocking the sun." Um, everybody has a big laugh about it. Everybody's like, "Ah, Dynes, you're so cool." Where Dyn was basically like, "No, King, I don't want anything from you." Which is kind of can be offensive, right? It's just it's just wit. I don't know how practical of a thing tool that is because if you're not a witty person um it might be more difficult for you but maybe the idea is like you can cut the tension with some humor is is an important point or you know with just with an intelligent phrase and it's harder said than done but if you're intelligent I guess keep using it or like witty keep using it. >> Yeah. Yeah. We don't live it in as much as a of at least American culture. There's not, you know, we're not quoting Hessiad or Homer too often, but you know, you can try it. But, you know, the examples from movies or comics that might work well. Um, related to this, you know, employ irony as needed when offering a recommendation. sort of in the funny case where someone's asked to recommend someone but you maybe you know you're in the position where you know that person perhaps doesn't deserve that recommendation. Uh but at the same time it would be an opportune to reject giving them a recommendation. You know that can be appropriate sometimes I suppose but I'm not sure how useful of a general rule that is. I think it's the same kind of idea as those the saying in quip. It's like cutting cutting the tension. >> Um yeah, another reflection. Regret is instantaneous. So swallow your false pride. I think that just that just connects to caving exacerbates problems initially. Perhaps a caving is tempting, but you know, shortly it will uh be seen to be a mistake. >> Mhm. >> Um using humor to decline an inappropriate request from below. We've discussed that a decent amount. Perhaps the only other bit to add to that is, you know, Plutarch's sensitive to some of these social dynamics. You know, who who's below you, who's above you, and that's something that is going to shape, you know, what sorts of responses are, what kinds of humor is, you know, ideal. You know, if someone's if someone's below you in a work type situation, perhaps it wouldn't be appropriate to joke about firing them or something of this sort, but in other cases, it would be, you know, [laughter] uh related to this, he says, "Guilt trip and highlight inappropriate requests from above." The next the next one we haven't touched as much. So the uh the next three we have um addicts show us what true resistance to pressure looks like. I think this is always a nice thought. You know, if you feel like you have to give in, you know, thinking about the uh ability of some people to act almost shamelessly, at least without any hint of dystopia, in pursuit of whatever their addiction is. >> Yeah. It's almost like a contemplation of the sage exercise, but it wouldn't be a sage, but it's like a [sighs] >> you know, it's like what does this look like in the extreme? >> Yeah, it's a great example. >> Yeah, it's it's an existence proof >> that you know it it's you're not it's not you're not forced to give in. >> Humans have the capability of doing this. You have the capability of doing this. You don't want to be acting like an like an addict in terms of being persistent and pushing through all social norms, but people have the capacity to do that. And so why are you not doing that? Well, it has says something about the way you're evaluating social norms and shame. And then and then as you said, once you have the existence proof that this is not like natural or necessary, then it becomes your responsibility about where you want to land on that continuum. >> Mhm. [clears throat] Absolutely. is next reflection. Welcome criticism from bullies. I think this is a good reminder. I think this is a good point because it's sort of the uh other side of the coin of all this which is being able to take criticism perhaps being able to take the uh violation of social norms when it's done to you and sort of you know using criticism as something to sift through you know see what's true in it. disregard whatever isn't and then uh move forward. >> So is the idea here I mean there's kind of two ideas there. One is you know listen to mean things people say about you even if you don't like them because there might be something good in that criticism something you can benefit from. But there was another idea there which was, you know, don't be so don't be so sensitive when people violate norms around you either. Like just kind of lower your sensitivity to these things. Try to make don't don't have it be overexaggerated how bad the thing you did with was when you stood up for yourself, but don't overexaggerate how bad it is when other people break these norms. So it's kind of is it both those points? Yeah, I think it's both those points, but it's especially this idea around sort of building a thicker skin, I suppose. >> And uh he quotes Pericles who says, "He who incurs hatred for the hardest decisions uh makes good decisions." Um there's a line from the yard your Kipling poem if which goes something like if you can keep your head when all around you doubt you but make allowance for their doubting too which I think communicates this principle of you know being able to be solid keep your head when others are criticizing you while focusing on making decisions you know making allowance for whatever their doubts are too uh if they're relevant. >> Yeah, good point. >> Last one. Memory is the best anecdote to caving in. A good focus on uh knowledge using memory is motivation to not give in. And uh you know, I think a good case to to end these reflections. It's just like think about how bad it sucked last time and use that for motivation. >> Yeah, absolutely. >> Two there's two personal examples I thought of when we're going through these reflections. I guess one is like a good example, one's a bad example, a bad or example of doing it poorly. Both are good examples. One is example of doing it well, one is example of doing it poorly. um the the poor doing it poorly, caving I imagine you know that that person you want to break up with but you just don't want to have that difficult conversation or you just don't want to have that breakup conversation. Uh, and so there's this kind of avoidance of, you know, there's there there's there's breaking that there's I don't know if that's a good example because I don't if it's a social norm. Maybe that's just conflict avoidance, but I think of that of kind of you're you're harming both of you by keeping up this facade because you're not willing to have that hard conversation. Um, that's an example I think of when you could use this skill. Um, an an example of when I've seen this skill done well, I remember I was at I was at work and I started working for a new company and you know there was maybe three of or four of us in a meeting and a junior person made a sexist joke and the senior person in the room was just like we just don't make those kind of jokes here. Like we just don't we just don't make sexist jokes at work. And it wasn't in like a okay, this person's getting fired or the whole thing's being blown up out of proportion. It was just like a really clear um standard setting at the expense of the social the the clapping at the bad performance example, right? Like it it was like, oh, somebody makes a joke, you're supposed to laugh. Even if you think the joke is bad, you're supposed to smile and laugh and move on. And it was just like, no, I'm going to break that norm and kind of set like clarify something here. Um, and it was it uh it was just an example of not caving that I thought really helped set the tone moving forward. Um, so that's that's an example of what we're aiming for as I understand it. >> Yeah, good examples. Great examples. If I were to sum up this work in rules. I was thinking about this towards the end. You know, what would the sort of the rules be you could take away from this heristic heruristics rules of thumb perhaps? you know always choosing the best option which seems perhaps not spite of the first pass seem not so useful but I think it's a reminder reminder that dysopia is hyper sensitivity to shame and it's thinking about you know you know what where might I be making a mistake or you know maybe I shouldn't do this because it'd be offensive instead of just thinking about what's the best thing to do here and having that you know being forefront uh of mind. We talked about starting small just sort of as as a practice thinking about those social situations that are easier to uh you know build up a thicker skin what have you practice not giving into pressure a reminder to act with tact I suppose ultimately it's a it's a mix it's a way to respect others you know how you give uh you know how you treat them of course how you give feedback how you do things that may violate these social norms and then And of course, the last rule is, you know, don't give in when you shouldn't. >> I think those are great rules at the at the risk of like, and it's a great way to end, but when I think about act with tact, that's just this idea. If you're breaking social norm A, you don't need to break social norm B, C, D, E. Either you don't need to throw them all out. Like, just break the one that you're that you're breaking on purpose. And don't be just this careless, thoughtless person and throw out the other ones. give people an out, you know, give people opportunities to save face, things like this. Um, and I love the always choose the best option thing because that's the ultimately the stoic answer is you're just you're always trying to choose the best option. And then when we look at vice, it's just different kinds of ignorance, different kinds of reasons we move away from the best option. And you could you could miss the best option because you're shameless. Like we talked about this the start of this episode, you could miss the best option for a lot of reasons, but now we're just this is just focusing on one reason people don't do the best thing, which is because they're they're worried about breaking social convention. They're worried about doing something embarrassing. And this is this was just a a fun philosophical reminder of of pushing through that and the importance of of focusing on that if that's something you're working on. >> Yeah, I'd certainly recommend this work to uh others. I think it's one I'll revisit throughout their uh my life. It's not too long, but it's I think it's deep and useful. There's uh the translation by Michael Fontaine that I mentioned, but also I find I think it's a log translation which is translated as on compliancy uh which I think is uh good as well. >> Yeah, I really enjoyed it. Thanks. Thanks for the recommendation. >> Awesome. Anything else? >> No, that was great. I'm going to start working on it. Start small. >> Perfect. All right. Thanks, Michael. >> Thanks, Gil. >> Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, [music] please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use, and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions.
