---
title: "Introduction to Aristotle's Golden Mean (Episode 184)"
slug: introduction-to-aristotle-s-golden-mean
episode_number: 184
youtube_id: CMTleUCPrOE
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CMTleUCPrOE
upload_date: 2025-05-20
duration: 55:55
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stowa Conversations. My name is Caleb Montiveres and I'm Michael Tromblé and today we're going to be talking about Aristotle walking a little off the path from stoicism and uh going to be discussing a different account, one of those classic different accounts of virtue, the good life, happiness and so on. Yeah, I wanted to do this episode um so the the point of this episode looking at Aristotle's ethics at a high level. So his view on how to live or how to be a good person. Um specifically want to focus on this idea of virtue as the golden mean or virtue as a mean between two extremes. That might might be new to some people that might be a very familiar concept to others. Um so what does that mean? what is Aristotle's account of you know how to live well and and what virtue looks like and also contrasted at the end with what the stoics think. So both to understand Aristotle better for for our own benefit and then also to improve our understanding of stoicism by providing this kind of foil. I really do think one of the best ways to understand what the Stoics are saying is to understand what other schools have said or what people that disagree with them say. And it really draws out the the both theoretical and practical implications of the Stoics better. When Aristotle disagrees, you you really have to make sure you understand what the Stoics are arguing and then decide based on that criteria whether or not you agree with them. Um so that's what we'll be doing today. I think Aristotle is this funny one because I found him a bit dry. I think everybody who reads Aristotle finds him a bit dry at first or certainly when you read him next to the Stoics. He was famously the student of Plato and depending on who you talk to possibly the greatest philosopher of all time. I know in the medieval ages he was referred to as the philosopher because he was just kind of the most profound thinker or kind of seen as the pinnacle of the ancient Greek tradition or Roman tradition. It's really like that was the Aristotle was the guy to a lot of people. Um I think that's maybe a bit more contested now. I think there's maybe a bit of a Plato resurgence, but I I know Aristotle is one of those ancient Greek philosophers also that's still treated pretty seriously by contemporary philosophy. Like it's not unusual to see contemporary philosophers citing or referring to Aristotle, whether that's in meta uh metaphysics, ethics, even political philosophy, even if it's just kind of situated as like, you know, the thinking started here with Aristotle and then it bounced around. we got to this end point. So, you know, somebody really taken seriously in philosophy. Um, another thing about Aristotle's approach to thinking is he was kind of um inductive. Uh, and so there's this this almost like bottom up or like observational approach. And I find when you read Aristotle, he'll start a lot of things. Um, you know, this this the Stoics make this appeal something we talk about a lot, Caleb. They make this appeal to nature and they say, "Well, to figure out the purpose of life, you've got to look at the nature of a human." And there's this kind of appeal to the natural world in all of ancient philosophy. But, um, Aristotle is almost a bit more like common sense. It's this appeal like, well, the average person thinks this or you know, if you walked around the marketplace, people would talk about virtue like this. And he almost uses that as a reference point. It's kind of interesting because he was also known for um a lot of advances in biology as well, like went out and um observed a lot of animals, recorded different species, their kind of breeding patterns, how they give birth, you know, their uh biology. And so he had this real, I guess, reverence, I'm trying to argue, he had this reverence for this observation of the world and not just this appeal to nature and this big end kind of stoic conception of the universe, but also um if I want to know how to live, I'm going to go out into the marketplace. I'm going to talk to people and maybe they're confused, maybe they're right or wrong, but there's at least something to be gained from almost this deductive qualitative observation approach. That's something I like about Aristotle. Um, and so any other anything else you want to say by way of background before we jump into his thinking? Well, I certainly butress that by saying Aristotle is um uh maybe one way to capture what you're saying is that he's an observational philosopher. And I'll say, you know, just as uh we can look around the world and see, and this is something we'll talk about in this podcast a lot, you know, the importance of excess and deficiency in health. And then he'll talk about some basic observation about health and then tie that in with ethics. So I think that's uh one way you see this sort of observational method playing out in in his thinking. And it is connected to biology. It's he he shares the same assumption with the Stoics about appealing to nature, I would say. But perhaps, you know, the Stoics really honed in on the rational side of nature, the rational side of ourselves. But perhaps Aristotle didn't hone in as much on a specific attribute, but instead is piecing together a number of different observations he's made about specific organisms, uh, about humans and such. So in that way it's perhaps more detailed and I think that's one of the perhaps the joys and frustrations of reading Aristotle. He's sort of that he is so detailed. He's he's a taxonomist of sorts drawing distinctions making observations and that can be very fruitful and sometimes difficult to to go through as well. Yeah. And another thing that's um fun about Aristotle, I guess two other things I wanted to add in support. So he's got this observational style and then I think just like funny facts, he's kind of notorious for getting some of these things wrong um too. Like he famously claimed that women have less teeth than men um and humans. And so there's this there's this almost this funny like there's there's so much um I don't know. It's it's just funny when you see something like that because it's like the such a smart person, such this kind of methodical approach, but still these mistakes come in. And I think that's something to keep an eye out for when you're, you know, then getting into these questions of like how to live and how to be. Um, and another thing about Aristotle, I made a comment about him being really boring at the start or dry, but we've actually lost a lot of his books and he had ones for popular audiences and then ones which were more um, you know, lecture notes for his students at the Lysum and that's kind of that's what we have left over at least the Nikameachian ethics which we're going to get into is one of those. And so he's he's a lot more dry or can be more I I would say academic than Senica or Epictitus or Marcus Aurelius. And part of that is probably just his style and disposition, but another part is that we've lost his um his writings that were for more of a popular audience and we have really his lecture notes for his students. Certainly the Nicameakian ethics that we'll be talking about falls in that category. And so you can think of like Epictitus and Marcus Aurelius and Senica reading and reflecting on the more academic of the Stoics, Chrysopus and Zeno. Um, but we don't really have their writings in in as great of detail where in Aristotle we still have those kind of original foundational texts where he really systematically lays everything out. Um, and that's that's that speaks to his style. Yeah, absolutely. And I suppose one other thing I should have said, there's no way if you're making any list of the greatest philosophers of ancient Greece, you know, there's no way Aristotle's not in the top top three. I think most people probably put him in the top two, but you know, if you're a stoic, you you know about Chrysopus, so maybe you tossed Chris in the top three as well, but I mean, he's certainly one of the greats. Yeah, definitely. Um, so cool. So, we'll jump into it. So, this is um again, Aristotle on the golden mean. What does that what does that mean? What does the mean mean? And um how does it contrast with the stoic view on virtue? So we're going to be talking about um Nicomeakian ethics. This is named after Aristotle's son Nicameakus. Um and it's his most famous work on ethics. It's considered um the most up-to-date one. Um so it's like possibly like the final the final stage of his thinking. um and some key claims. We're going to be focusing a lot on books one and two, mostly on book two where he actually makes this claim for virtue as a kind of mean. Um and some key parts that we get in book one um leading into book two that lets us get into virtue or the nature of virtue. So in in book one, Aristotle establishes udeministic ethics. Uh and this is this view I mean we talk about this all the time Caleb was this this idea comes from Aristotle or at least it's systematically laid out in Aristotle which is that everything we do has an ends or a goal. If you ask why long enough you get back to the final goal that all things have which is happiness. So you know why do I wake up in the morning to go to work? Why do I go to work? Well to you know do well in my job. Why do I want to do well in my job? Well, either because I find it meaningful or because I want money. Why do you want meaning or money? Well, because they make me happy. And everything, every line of question ends up with that final response. You know, we think, well, that's what is a good life. Like, I I don't have I there's no way to justify wanting a good life. That is just the bedrock of, you know, what what you can want. And then so then Aristotle sets out in the book to say well okay if the if the goal of life then is happiness that is the the tilos or the ends for humans. What is the content of that? What does that look like? What is what does it involve? And he ends up arguing that it's got to involve human excellence. It's got to involve virtue. You know so you you can't be happy or have a great life unless you are being a great human. That's that's one of his arguments. Another thing is that um so that that's one part. Another thing he talks about in book one which differentiates himself from the stoics immediately and this is pre- stoicism. So he wasn't differentiating himself but he just disagrees is that the soul is divided into three parts. So when you say becoming an excellent human what is a human? Well at the very least it is our soul and our soul has three parts. It's got a vegetative part that's shared with all living things, but it doesn't responsive to reason. You can't communicate with it. You've got an appetitive part. So, that is um that's what desires things. You know, that's the part of you that maybe um you know, gets hungry. Um you jumps away from pain. Um you know, maybe gets in a gets in a in a really bad mood if you haven't been sleeping enough. and wants to just drop everything, go to sleep. That's me at least. So, it desires things. It's kind of connected with the body, but it it it can listen to reason. So, you can be like, "Look, you know, you're driving a car. Don't fall asleep now even though you're really sleepy. You know, just stop. Just just stay a little bit longer. You get some you get a good sleep." Or you're driving, don't eat at this gas station even though you're really hungry. If you keep driving a little bit longer, there'll be an even tastier meal. So, you can kind of communicate with the appetitive part of yourself. It can collaborate with reason. The vegetative part of yourself, I should have said, that's something probably, you know, the part of you that makes your bones grow or something or the part of you that like communicates with your, you know, um, makes your makes your muscles respond to weightlifting or something. It's it's not it's not the kind of thing you engage with with reason. And then the third part is the rational part of yourself. That's the part that is uh has reason is rational and can order and command the appetitive part. So since we have these these three parts of the soul virtues then are of two kinds Aristotle argues. First there is the intellectual virtues which are correspond to the rational part of the soul. These are things you learn through instruction and knowledge. Um and then there are moral virtues. Um these are correspond to the irrational repetitive part of the soul and these are things that you have to learn through um habituation and practice. So that I think is the first division. The stoics think of the soul as being unified. You're just you're just uh rational thing. Um and Aristotle thinks no, you kind of got this these these multiple parts of you and then they become excellent in different ways. The rational part of you becomes excellent through learning. The um appetitive part of yourself becomes excellent through habituation and training. Um the same way you would think of, you know, an animal would have an appetitive part of yourself. How do you make an excellent dog? It's not by sitting down and talking to the dog. It's by training the dog, punishing them when they do something wrong, rewarding them when they do something right, and then you end up with with an excellent an excellent uh pet. uh or and you think of the same kind of thing for yourself or for for people. You can teach them intellectual virtues but you need to train them in moral virtues. One last part and then and then see if you have any any thoughts Caleb is that virtues are not natural is another thing he clarifies. We're not born with virtue otherwise we wouldn't require intervention to develop. Virtues are like a skill or a craft. This is actually an interesting response to the Stoics because the Stoics say virtue is knowledge. It's living in accordance with reason. And then the stoics have to respond, well, if if you know, virtue is living in accordance with reason. If being a good person is living in accordance with reason, why is everybody such terrible people? Uh, and the stoics have to say, well, you kind of get corrupted. Things happen. Um, Aristotle makes a different analogy. Says, "No, uh, virtue is like a craft. It's like a skill. You're not born knowing how to, uh, shoot a bow, an arrow. You're not born knowing how to paint. You have to you have to develop this excellence." um you know they're they're either developed or destroyed based on how we act. And I have some quotes here. This is from book two part one. Aristotle says the virtues on the other hand we acquire by first having actually practiced them just as we do the arts. We learn an art or craft by doing the things that we shall have to do when we have learned it. For instance, men become builders by building houses, harpers by playing the harp. Similarly, we become just by doing just acts, temperate by doing temperate acts, brave by doing brave acts. And again, even later party says again the actions from or through which any virtue is produced are the same as those through which it is destroyed, just as is the case with skill and arts. For both the good harpers and the bad ones are produced by harping, similarly with builders and all other craftsmen. As you will become a good builder from building well, so you will become a bad one from building badly. And this is another consequence of the skill view is, you know, if you think of that in sport, there's this there's this almost this sense that it's better to take somebody who's never played tennis than somebody who's played bad tennis and developed all these bad habits. And he's he's saying so you know if you never if you never encounter anything scary you you just start at this exact neutral place but if you encounter scary things and you act fearfully you don't display courage. You're actually the craft is really encountering scary things. If it's temperance it's encountering things you desire. And then you're either you're either made stronger or weakened by those instances. But you're not anything until you're you're doing the thing that builds it. You don't have any you only innate potential until you've built a house or tried to build a house. Um likewise for the virtues, it's a little bit different because I guess we you know people go around not playing instruments all the time, but people don't really go around their day-to-day not encountering situations that require bravery or temperance. Sure. his his point his point is is is makes sense but I mean practically there's a bit of a difference but it's just that um you only build or weaken them by doing the corresponding thing either well or poorly. So that's the setup. I think we need to get to the um to talk about the golden mean. But anything you wanted to add to that? I think that was yeah that was really well summarized. So I suppose just to put in my own words you know we have this this question sort of philosophical question about you know what is the purpose of life? What does it mean to live a good life? that Aristotle is proposing happiness is the tilos of human life and in particular you diamondia it doesn't mean happiness you know as we always clarify it doesn't exactly just mean happiness terms of a blissful state and such it's uh something a deeper state you know what is as you say being an excellent human being and it's also it's not just an outcome but it's better thought of as an activity, you know, being an excellent human being, doing what excellent human beings do. And I'd say that's another important clarification Aristotle makes and is sometimes at odds with how uh we think about happiness when we purely think of it as a binary state. You're either in or not. You know, if you think I'm happy now, I'm not happy now. For Aristotle, that means in order for you to be happy, you need to be doing the sorts of things uh that a happy human would be doing. So I think that's an interesting framing when you think about you know the the concept of happiness in your own life. But yeah that that's well summarized. So I suppose we've got that purpose some picture of human nature. It unlike the stoics as you say it involves these uh aspects of the organism have to do with the body the vegetative the appetitive parts of the soul. And then also another distinction between the stoics be that comes out of that is this difference uh in the kinds of virtues you have the intellectual and the moral virtue and also that that practical point on you know what does it take to be moral well it's uh requires habituation and I think that's uh such a uh you know in a sense just a common sense observation but really is uh quite deep and useful if you're thinking about building skills in your own life and thinking about virtues, moral virtues as habits. Yeah, I I do think a lot about Aristotle's ideas around habituation. I find that really helpful in my own practice. So now we're in a position to talk about what does the golden mean? You know, what's what's going on here? So Aristotle, he he's established that, you know, you got these intellectual and moral virtues. You build them by doing things that correspond to them like any other craft or skill. You know, nobody's getting better at archery while painting. Maybe this the kind of, you know, there's the karate kid, wax on, wax off. Maybe that person's getting better at karate, but at the end of the day, you got to do karate to get better at karate. You got to do brave, courageous things to become more courageous and brave. Um, so but Aristotle next moves to this question of well, what actually is virtue? What what does what does that mean? um you know that seems like a vague question but for the stoics they would say well virtue is knowledge right it's achieved by um living in accordance with nature which means understanding nature the way it is but Aristotle has a has a different answer he's going to say that virtue is a middle ground it's a mean between excesses just like any other desirable state and I'll quote here from book two part two of the nikameakan ethics Aristotle says first of all then we have to observe that moral qualities ities are so constituted as to be destroyed by excess and by deficiency as we see is the case with bodily strength and health for one is forced to explain what is invisible by means of v visible illustrations Aristotle is just saying look I'm just going to make an analogy here strength is destroy is destroyed both by excessive and deficient exercises and similarly health is destroyed both by too much and by too little food and drink while they are produced increased and preser preserved by suitable quantities. The same, therefore, is true of temperance, courage, and other virtues. The man who runs away from everything in fear and never endures anything becomes a coward. The man who fears nothing whatsoever, but encounters everything becomes rash. Similarly, he that indulges in every pleasure and refra refrains from none turns out to be to be proflegate. Don't actually know that one. Um, and he that shuns all pleasure as borish people do becomes what may be called insensible. Thus, temperance and courage are destroyed by excess and deficiency and preserved by the observation of the mean. Um, and so what Aristotle is saying here is look, if you want to build muscle, you can't you can't lift too much. You'll hurt yourself and you can't lift too little. If you want to be a good body weight, you can't eat too much and you can't eat too little. When we think about and we talk about developing other kinds of excellence, we think about uh reaching the the correct and appropriate quantity um the correct and appropriate amount. And so when we think about virtue, we should think about it in the same way. Courage is the is the right amount of fearfulness. It is running away when you should run away and it's standing your ground when you should stand your ground. Um, another thing that he calls out is that um, how you feel when acting is important when we talk about virtue. So, it's not just I I said I said, you know, courage is running away when you should run away and standing when you should stand. But for Aristotle, that's not enough. He's actually going to say, well, you've got to actually feel the right way about it, too. And he says, quote, an index of our dispositions is afforded by the pleasure or pain that accompanies our actions. A man is temperate if he abstains from bodily pleasure and finds this abstinence itself enjoyable. Proflegate if he feels it's irksome. He is brave if he faces danger with pleasure or at all events without pain. Cowardly if he does so with pain. So in other words, uh you're not truly cou courageous by standing up to the army. You're courageous when you do it and you don't feel distress or in maybe even pleasure in some cases. So it's it this is the first kind of hint we get from Aristotle reading this that it's not just consequentialist kind of picture of what did you do, it's also how did it feel to do it. Um when we're when we're looking at genuine examples of of virtue um anything to add there before we go further? Yeah, I think that matters. how it feels matters because that's how we become habituated as you know this translation uses the word index but I suppose you'd also think of as measurement or perhaps information that's easier to form habits that involve uh you know the right amount of pleasure that makes it easy uh you know easy to repeat than action yeah the point is not like you're a bad person he Aristotle is going to say um pretty explicitly that better to be the person that stands up to the army with fear and feels distress than the person who runs away. You just don't point to that person and say that's an example of courage. You know, sometimes we say in contemporary like sometimes we say today, you know, everybody feels afraid. It's just how you respond to it. And Aristotle is going to say, no, no, no. The great people aren't afraid, but good for you for practicing. Um, I think of this, you know, you think of this like a like a instrument. It's like the really great musician is just naturally expressing themselves. And if you're sitting there and you're playing the same song, but it's very intentional. It's taking a lot of effort. You're finding it very uncomfortable. Aristotle is going to say, "Great, you're practicing. You're not a great musician yet. We don't point to you as an example. The great musicians are can do that stuff naturally. They've habituated, as you've said, but you're practicing. You're getting closer. So, it's not to knock that kind of behavior. You should still do the right things if it's difficult, but it's to say you've not really you haven't achieved the end goal yet. If it's still difficult for you, the example I give too is like, you know, if your friend asks you for a favor or even in my own, you know, I think about this in my own relationship, sometimes you my wife will ask for help with something and sometimes I will do it graciously and quickly and sometimes I'll be like, "Oh, I really don't want to I really don't want to do that. I'm enjoying, you know, relaxing or uh whatever I'm doing." And you know the actions the same but you want to try to become the kind of person that that helps um you know helps out of a genuine desire to do so. That is like a better that is a better way to be and Aristotle thinks you can get there by by doing it enough. Yeah that's a yeah that that's that's a good clarification. I suppose something else that comes out of this that that I think uh is a useful point is the idea that negative feelings, negative emotions can be appropriate for some circumstances. You know, for Aristotle, grief is appropriate uh when something tragic has happened. But even for perhaps smaller events, you know, feeling nervous before a important performance as a musician in some sense is, you know, if it's if it's too intense, it's not appropriate. But some amount of nervousness could be optimal. You know, it signals the the importance of the event and the if you are not nervous at all, perhaps there there's be some risk of treating the uh the performance uh too flippant a manner. So I think that's a another nice upshot is negative feelings, emotions for in Aristotle um and for the stoics as well. you know, you think about the the role of caution to some extent um or at least the role of negative feelings for the Stoics, but for for Aristotle, I think uh he gives both pleasure and pain a purpose. Uh I suppose is one way to put it. Yeah. I mean, we'll get into that in more detail as we go, but I think that the important point is that differentiation between what you do and then how you're feeling while you're doing it is very important for Aristotle. And I mean, it's important for the Stoics, too. So, but as you said, how you're feeling can sometimes sometimes it's appropriate to feel a bit negative or even very negative, very upset. Um, so you think about he's not going to idealize the person who goes on for a performance and doesn't feel any nerves and is nonchalant. That person is probably a bit um you doesn't have the correct reverence for the importance of a performance. He's going to look at that person who's the right amount of nervous and say that's great. And then maybe if you can fake it till you make it and look like you're not nervous and go out and perform well. Aristotle is going to say, "Well, you know, you you were close to that right middle, but you still need to feel on the inside. It still matters what you feel on the inside. Doesn't matter if you could pass in front of the crowd or not, right? You still got to get that that that just enough nervousness, but not too much." Um, and so I'm going back to my notes here, going a bit over what we said, but it's worth repeating. As as I as you read through book two, Aristotle notes an issue where he says, you know, if a person's doing something courageous, then how can they be learning anything? Because um, you know, if if if you stand if you go on stage and you play, how can you be practicing courage? Because clearly you're already courageous. You got on stage and you played. And Aristotle is saying we we uh we're normally just doing courageous acts. We're not being courageous. He makes that distinction again between the inside and the outside. Uh we're acting well in the moment, but we're not demonstrating virtue unless we have all the proper components, which is that internal disposition and then the actual action. Um think of this like a BJ competitor. We just use the example of performance versus a a newbie versus experienced competitor. So one person's imitating one per but one but building the skill um at the same time while the other person it just comes naturally to them because they practiced enough. And he says here we demonstrate a virtue when we do something for the right reason. Um that's knowledge. It's I think the intellectual aspect um deliberately. So that uh that is this emotional aspect. We want to do it. We desire to do it. Um and then also from our disposition he says it's not virtue if we do it in the spur of the moment. Um so sometimes I mean sometimes I guess the idea is we can just kind of chance or luck into doing by accident the broken clock is right twice a day. You just did the objectively right thing. But um it wasn't it wasn't coming from your it wasn't coming from your disposition. Um it's not how you normally act. It was kind of a I guess if you think of like a musician playing the right note um you know unless you have that kind of understanding of why you're doing it and it's kind of built into your skill. Um so there's a quote here from Aristotle. He says moreover the case of the arts is not really analogous to that of the virtues. Works of art have their merit in themselves so that it's enough if they are produced having a certain quality of their own. But acts done in conformity with the virtues are not done justly or temporately if they themselves are of a certain sort, but only if the agent also is in a certain state of mind when he does them. First, he must act with knowledge. Second, he must deliberately choose the act and choose it for its own sake. And thirdly, the act must spring from a fixed and permanent disposition of character. So, this is the part that I was speaking to before, but also he's clarifying again that consequentialist versus internal picture. Um, if you make a great work of art, it doesn't matter if you spilt and knocked over the can of paint and it made something cool by accident, there's still something cool in the world. Aristotle's like, "No, there's no virtue. Even if you stumbled into doing the right thing, you've got to do it uh you got to do it for the right reason. You got to have knowledge. You got to deliberately choose it because it's the right thing to do. You got to want to do it and then it's got to spring from a fixed or permanent disposition of your character, not just a and and you can think of this, you know, somebody who's just kind in the moment. It's not really I guess it's not really kind of a robust kindness. It's not same as the kind of person that has a disposition to be kind. Sure. Yeah. Absolutely. There's a a nice practical point that Aristotle makes around this section where he notes that we become temperate by abstaining from pleasures. At the same time, we are best able to abstain from pleasures when we have become temperate. And so with courage, we become brave by training ourselves to despise and endure terrors. And we shall best be able to endure terrors when we have become brave. That just that point that these skills are self-reinforcing in a way. You know, by practicing abstaining from pleasures, it becomes easier to be temperate. and by being temperate becomes easier to uh practice and so on. So I think that's um I think that that's just a nice observation. Well, there's this kind of idea of you know practice makes perfect and then people will say in sport, well no practice doesn't make perfect. Perfect practice makes perfect. And it's this idea that it's better to drill slowly and correctly a couple times than drill poorly many times. And that's kind of what I'm that's what I think about when I hear that line is that, you know, the the the good basketball player shoots correctly and you get better by the number of reps you've done with good technique. So the better your technique you are, the better it is to rep the good technique and so it kind of compounds and builds on itself. So it kind of requires the most effort at the beginning. It's the most difficult to build the skill at the beginning. Yeah, I think that's correct. I think there's also the idea that perhaps progress is uh nonlinear and you know as you get better at any skill, you know, someone who is uh in the advanced or expert parts of those skill because they've made so much progress, they're able to combine their traits or they're able to avoid making terrible decisions that would set them back. And because of that, they're just going to be levels above beginners, noviceses, and so on. So I think maybe there's that point here from the moral domain as well. You know as you become say take moderation as example as you become more moderate you're able to abstain from pleasures they would set you back a little bit and just repeatedly doing that can put you uh uh to the extent that these sorts of things can be measured that can put you uh eons ahead of maybe where you were a year ago or something like this if you can continue that practice. Uh so I think there's there's something inspirational there and there's also maybe the uh there's also the message around risks there that if you don't you know abstain for pleasures now then then then you are sending yourself back and in in a way perhaps robing yourself of that progress as well. Well I also and we've got we've got more to go into so I don't want to go on this for too long but I mean there's also a piece of empathy there right like it's it's the people that are the worst off have the heart have it the hardest to get better. Um, I think about this in terms of something like investing, right? Like when you have the least amount of money, there's probably the most upside to developing good habits around uh, you know, financial literacy and skills, but it's actually the most difficult to do so because to save part parts of your money is incredibly impactful. Um and so likewise, you know, the the the intemperant person, the person who's struggling with um drugs or alcohol or food can most benefit from temperance but has the hardest time doing it because they're the most habituated or disposed already or, you know, in a cycle. So there is some empathy there too for people that struggle and that's why you almost require I would say this kind of intense intervention or intense focus in these moments to try to get that cycle swinging the other direction and and Aristotle is just attuned to that I think. Absolutely. All right let's get back on track. Cool. So I wanted to talk about the golden mean a bit more. So we've already framed okay Aristotle thinks okay virtue is this this middle between excess and deficiency. It's like you know a good diet is not eating too much food. It's not eating too little. A good exercise routine is not lifting too much lifting too little. What are the actual practical implications of this? What is it what does this mean in more detail? Well one it's that virtue is not about absolutes. It's not about for the Stoics, it's very much about absolutes. Anger is always wrong. It's not in Aristotle's picture. Sometimes it's a it's a right to be angry. Sometimes it's right to be sad or grieve. Sometimes we feel pleasure. Sometimes we feel pain. It's about achieving the right balance in the in the moment relative to you. And so he says in book two part six, for example, one can be frightened or bold, feel desire or anger or pity and experience experience pleasure and pain in general either too much or too little and in both cases wrongly. Whereas to feel these things at the right time on the right occasion towards the right people for the right purpose and in the right manner is to feel the best amount of them which is the mean amount and the best amount is of course the mark of virtue. So uh we find the mean Aristotle says by experiencing things at the right time in the right place towards the right people for the right reason and in the right way. So a lot of components there but the the takeaway there as you were alluding to earlier is that sometimes the right time and right place is to be angry. It's to uh you know lash out to out of anger because someone's harmed you and they deserve punishment. Sometimes it is to grieve because a very bad thing has happened to you and it is to feel uh the appropriate amount. You know the the the stoics build when when the stoics say things like anger or grief, they're going to call these passions. So they're already going to build this pjorative language into it where they're necessarily wrong. I'm not an expert on Aristotle's theory of emotions, but the important part here is that look there there isn't there is an appropriate time for these things whereas the stoic's going to deal more in absolutes. No, we never feel anger because that's a passion. Passions are always wrong. Um, so as Aristotle says um in more detail, here's another great quote. Virtue then is a settled disposition of the mind determining the choice of actions and emotions consisting essentially in the observation of the mean relative to us. This being determined by principle, that is, as the prudent man would determine it. And it is a mean state between two vices, one of excess and one of defect. Furthermore, it is a mean state in that whereas the vices either fall short of or exceed what is right in feelings and in actions, virtue ascertains and adopts the mean. Hence, while in respect of its substance and the definition that states what it really is, in essence, virtue is the observation of the mean, in point of excellence and rightness, it is an extreme. So I guess there's an interesting point there which is that it is in one sense an extreme but it's the extreme middle. It's the extreme rightness. Um and so he's just saying there um there there's a bit of circularity there at least in this quote which is that you know virtue is is is the disposition of the mind determining the right thing to do and to feel relative to us and to like who we are and the situation that we're in, you know, as the prudent person would determine it. So as the virtuous person would determine it. So there's a bit of and I think that's a bit of a skillfulness, right? That's where we that's where we're lucky to have the craft analogy, right? The the you know the correct play is the play that the excellent soccer player would make if they had your body and were in your position and the score of the game is the score that it is or it's the note the excellent musician would play if they were listening to the song and playing along to the song you're playing along to. So there's this there's this relative it's relativistic because it it um matters who you are and the situation that you're in. But it's but it's always going to be this balance between excess and and deficiency. So some examples that he lays out, courage is the mean between fear and rashness. Temperance is the mean between being sensible and proflegate. Liberality is sharing liberality and sharing money is the mean between meanness and uh prodigality. So um sharing too much honor is the mean between vanity and smallalness of soul. I like that idea of smallalness of soul is is just like not respecting yourself or not like thinking you know underestimating how good you really are. Yeah it's a great phrase in regard in regards to anger. Gentleness is the mean between irassibility and spiritlessness. Again you get that spiritlessness. Um where the Stokes would say anger is never right. Aristotle says, "Well, you don't want to be the person that anything will will tick you off, but you also don't want to be this person that has no spirit, has nothing that you will stand up for." And righteous indignation is the mean between envy and malice. Um, so sometimes one extreme is worse than another. Um, I would say probably irrassibility is worse than spiritlessness. But the mean is not always about landing exactly in the middle. It's about hitting the appropriate balance. And sometimes that appropriate balance is going to be it's not literally like if one is a one. If it's if it's a zero and two, I've always got to hit one. It's it's about sometimes this the situation is going to de demand more vanity. And sometimes it's going to demand more smallness of soul. Sometimes it's going to demand more fear. Sometimes it's going to demand more rashness. It's about hitting that that um um that right balance. anything to add to that? Maybe one quick quick aside that I I should state is um I think there's some there is some interpretive debate about how you know how to properly understand the doctrine of the mean you know is it to what extent does think all virtues fall on uh you know make make for a mean uh is this more of a heristic you know maybe a rule of thumb he is clear that not all actions and emotions follow this rule. Um, so you know there are some actions that are simply uh intrinsically wrong. You know there's the lists malice or shamelessness. You know there's no there's no mean to find there. uh but but you know however you answer this interpretive question I think he gives us a number of examples courage temperance liberality honor that uh you know prove this is a useful notion yeah I think we're like I think we need to be really careful with language too because what I take Aristotle to be saying is that when we think about the right thing to do it's best to think about everything as a spectrum and you're trying to land in the right middle ground of that spectrum. And so, you know, you have the bully and you have the kid that's bullied. And then the the right middle ground is the person who can stand up for themselves but doesn't go around bullying other people, right? That's the that's the that's the right mix between overtly aggressive and overtly passive. And so when you say something like malice, you know, you're not talking about a spectrum there. You're talking about uh the the an end point that is just a bad one. So I think it's like and we're mixing the Greek and the English. So I think it's just like I think it's I mean I agree with you. I'm if Aristotle says that that makes sense that there's going to be some things that you know we just don't think of in terms of a spectrum. Um just doesn't make sense to talk about them that way. Um but but I it's just this idea of instead of a binary we think about things on a spectrum and then in that case every spectrum is going to have no goes on either ends of it. Um and but that but the where we land on the spectrum is you know rel relative to ourselves and our circumstance. Yeah. Absolutely. And I think you know he's very clear that he says emotions and specific emotions and actions do not fall within a meme but virtue is not an emotion or an action. It's okay that's that's the distinction I got to go. It's uh you know this dispositional thing that you know as you say dealing with continuums complexity and such and I think that's that's where the mean comes in. Okay. I got it. So like you think about some sort of terrible action you know I can't you know I can think of some but like I can't um think of some ter the most terrible thing you could imagine that you would never want to do. And it's like yeah there's never going to be a situation where that is what somebody with virtue does. But that's not really what we're talking about. the when we're talking about um as you said the disposition that that balance between being overly aggressive and overly passive that makes you the kind of person that stands up for yourself and stands up for people weaker than you but doesn't go around starting fights and there are some things that person would never do but that disposition but we're not talking about that we're talking about the disposition um yeah that's a great distinction yeah absolutely yep so some things that this means in practice to finish us off I just wanted to you know that was a lot theory. I wanted to bring it back some so some practical implications of this. What does the golden mean mean for us or mean for Aristotle? In plain words first first thing this means that virtue is um multifaceted. So it involves knowledge and pleasure which is habituated. So it involves knowing the right thing to do and feeling the right way about it. You got to do the right thing for the right reason and feel good. So it's not it's not sing it doesn't have one dimension. It has multiple dimensions. It combines the moral and the intellectual in Aristotle's words. Second is that virtue is finding the right balance between extremes. Um it is that disposition the correct disposition on a spectrum of dispositions. Um the third point is that the balance depends on you and the situation. I think this is where the art metaphor is most important. The skilled musician picks the right note. Skilled athlete knows when to sprint and when to hold back. The perfect painting can have nothing added or removed to it. So the virtuous person um is the same way when deciding how much anger to feel, for example. You know, they they just they just they've got they've developed a skill through habituated practice um that lets them, you know, land on the right note, so to speak. I would I I put here and maybe this is what we were clarifying that no category of action is really off limits. That's another point only context dependent for Aristotle. There are times when when we can feel really angry. There are times when we can feel afraid or grieve. We just need to find the right amount. Maybe the distinction I would make now since what you said Caleb is category is kind of vague. Maybe there are some specific emotions and actions that are out of bounds. No, there will be no context where that is the right thing to fall on. But there is no I guess spectrum that you need to always remain on one end of um like if you if you told the Stoics there was a a spectrum of anger, the Stoics would say, "Well, you can't you can't dip your foot into it. You can't do anything with it." And that's not really the way Aristotle is going to think about it. Yeah. Or maybe another way to put it is uh for Aristotle and I think for the Stoics as well, there's no simple decision procedure you can follow for every Mhm. um every circumstance whereas perhaps for other ethical systems, you know, they'll give you sufficient rules that'll illuminate what you're supposed to do. Yeah. Yeah. And so the last part I wanted to get into then so that that's that's the gold mean. I think it's a cool idea. It's it's a different way of thinking about it. And I'll I'll contrast it now with the differences with stoicism. So the the implications and the differences are really clear. First is that for the Stoics, virtue is just knowledge. Pleasure follows from knowledge. Um it feels good to do the thing you know is right for the Stoics. So there's no need to habituate yourself to enjoy something. In stoicism you only need to understand its goodness. Now we want to be careful when we say habituation because Aristotle means something specific about it. I I do think in stoicism you want to do things continually. I think in stoicism you want to develop habits. But when Aristotle talks about habituation he talk he means training a nonrational part of yourself the same way your anim animalistic part of yourself. That picture does not exist in stoicism. Um, that's not to say stoics don't have habits or practices or things that they do repeatedly. They also have dispositions, right? You can have a disposition or a habit as a stoic to question your first impressions of situations. That's something you train and practice and develop, but it's not something um again it's not it's not an anim animalistic response to pleasure or pain that you've that you've um cultivated over time through training. Another change with stoicism is that virtue is in stoicism virtue is not about finding the balance between extremes. It's binary. Virtue is doing the right thing. It's knowing the right thing and then hence doing it. Vice is anything that is wrong. So it's not uh it's again it's not about finding your the correct location on a spectrum. Um, it is I would say the the there there's going to be either you're allowed to feel that thing or you're not. And either this is the appropriate context to feel it or it isn't. But there's a lot more things that are out of bounds. So revenge, jealousy, grief, anger, envy, all of these things are out of bounds for the stoics, and they're not going to think about, well, this is a situation that deserves more anger, so it's okay that you got more angry. Um that that to be said the stoics for the stoics sometimes virtue is context dependent. So how to act appropriately does depend on your roles and your relationships. Um so there is there is some there's a strong contextual feature to living correctly in stoicism. But sometimes virtue is absolute. Um so acting ignorantly or being angry is always wrong for example. So another another point I want to call out is that the Stoics exclude certain categories of behavior. Maybe categories isn't the right way to talk about this, but the sage never feels distress at something present for example. So there there is no case as a stoic whereas we're feeling distressed and extremely upset, passionately upset about something we're experiencing is appropriate. There's no mean. there's no you you've got to grieve the right amount. You've got to be angry the right amount. Um because they have this uh binary axiology, it just doesn't make sense to talk about the appropriate amount of anger. And then the last point I would say is that Aristotle's virtue is more permissive. Um it allows differing kinds of experiences for the great person who encounters different scenarios. I would say in stoicism you only really ever encounter one good thing and one bad thing, virtue and vice. And so the sage emotionally, this is my argument, the emotionally sages would be pretty similar. If you had a bunch of stoic sages hanging out, I think they would be dispositionally uh pretty similar. Maybe they have, you know, one has more of a sense of humor, one's a bit quieter, um, but they're responding to the situations they encounter, uh, with with a similar emotional situation, a similar emotional response. Whereas, I think for Aristotle, there might be great people could kind of look different. You could have this great person who's maybe a bit more aggressive and angry and assertive and you could have a great person who's a bit more I don't know maybe intellectual long-term thinking. Um I think I think the Aristotle's picture of great people allows different kinds of great people in a way that maybe stoicism doesn't. But that's that's my own thinking. What do you think about those? Nice. I think that's a solid list. I understand more what you mean by categories now. So I I think uh yeah that's a good point. And um perhaps one other bit to add to that list is that for the stoics virtue is unitary just as the self is unitary. So you're either virtuous or you're not. Whereas Aristotle's happy to say you can be courageous even if you are not exemplifying other virtues. This you know the stoics they thought if you're truly being courageous then all the other virtues must be present as well. So I actually was doing some reading on this and apparently there is this view that Aristotle believes in the unitary nature of the virtues which seems really weird to me. It's something I need to do a bit more reading up on because I read in a book and I was like that's silly. Only the Stoics think that. And then it was like apparently it's I don't know if it's universally agreed. I'm not an Aristotle expert but it's like some people think it. It doesn't seem to make much sense to me. It like really ruins my perspective of Aristotle because the way I understand Aristotle is the same one you did, Kayla, which is like, yeah, you're courageous because you did the right thing at the right time for the right reason in relation to courage. That doesn't have anything to do with, you know, how you act as a in in terms of justice, like how you allocate punishments or something. Um, but apparently there's some controversy of that in the academic literature. Oh, no. You're you're probably right. I think what I just said, what I strictly said is probably wrong in the sense that um if you're courageous, the other virtues for Aristotle probably do need to be present. You're probably right about that. But maybe there he wants to say they're metaphysically distinct in a way the Stoics don't. And maybe that's where there's going to be debates and perhaps there's some scholarly debate about that as well. We'll get ready for the follow-up episode. we'll do the the unitary nature of the virtues because it doesn't make sense to me. Anyway, we don't need we're going to end on on this like uh um but as you said, I think I think we can both agree on the metaphysical distinction which is that it's like a multi-sided object for the Stoics. Like we you can talk about courage, but what you're really talking about is also temperance and justice because you're always just talking about knowledge. where for Aristotle even if he believes in the unitary nature of the virtues it's courage is going to be a different thing than temperance maybe he's got some sort of perspective that it's impossible to be courageous if your lack of temperance is getting in the way but they're not literally the same thing because um you know they're not they're not all just knowledge they're also this habituation and this moral moral aspect as well yeah yeah absolutely well I think that was an awesome summary of Aristotle great introduction ction to um you're really a deep deep thinker and philosopher. So, thanks for listening. Thanks for putting that together, Michael. Yeah, it was fun. Thanks, Kil. Peace. Thanks for listening to Stowa Conversations. Please give us a rating on Apple Podcasts or Spotify and share it with a friend. If you want to dive deeper still, search Stowa in the App Store or Play Store for a complete app with routines, meditations, and lessons designed to help people become more stoic. And I'd also like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. You can find more of his work at ancient liar.com. And finally, please get in touch with us. Send a message to stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback, questions, or recommendations. Until next time.
