---
title: "Marcus Aurelius On What To Read (Episode 189)"
slug: marcus-aurelius-on-what-to-read
episode_number: 189
youtube_id: 64yNl42CdSU
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=64yNl42CdSU
upload_date: 2025-06-24
duration: 17:07
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Caleb Monttoveros and today I'm going to be talking through and thinking through a piece I wrote last year entitled Marcus Aurelius Against the Great Books. It's really about how to think about what to read. And this is something I've been pondering over the last few months in particular. Something that I haven't completely made my mind over to be honest. So I could see my thinking evolve here. But I think the line of thought that I've pursued kicked off is grounded in a correct intuition about the value of reading and perhaps the most important kinds of things to read. So let's kick this off and talk through it. Would Marcus Aurelius be against the great books? Marcus reminds himself again and again to do away with them. Throw away your books. No longer distract yourself. It is not allowed. But as if you were now dying, despise the flesh. It is blood and bones and a network, a contexture of nerves, veins, and arteries. That's from meditations 22. Marcus Aurelius has work to do, an empire to run, a life to live. There is a movement of sorts behind compiling lists of great books and seeking to read through them. These lists are full of philosophical and literary masterpieces. See St. John's reading lists and curriculum for a good example of this. And there are obvious arguments for going through lists like these. A common one, perhaps the best one, we ought to experience the best literature and philosophy man has created. To fail to be educated in such experiences is to fail to live. But is this true? It can't just be the experience of reading such works. You know, we're not hedonists here. And by that I just mean it's not the fact that these works produce a sensation. That can't be the value of the work. So it needs to be something more than pure sensation. Another argument, another framing on this. Wrestling with these authors and books is intrinsically worthwhile. This may be true enough, but it's not sufficient. Many things are intrinsically worthwhile. Perhaps it is the insight or moral improvement offered by great books. Yet, it's easy to find champions of the great books decrying their moral value. See Harold Bloom of the Western cannon. He wrote, "Reading the very best writers, let us say Homer, Dante, Shakespeare, Toltoy, is not going to make us better citizens. Art is perfectly useless." According to the sublime Oscar Wild, who was right about everything. Of course, one could argue this is posturing. To find moral value, you can't look for it. It's better to approach great works with an aesthetic gaze. There's something to this. But Bloom's citation of Oscar Wild, hardly an ethical character, suggests he suggests we should take his argument in the straightforward way. Art does not improve. At least not necessar at least not necessarily. And so Marcus Aurelius writes to himself, "No longer wander at Hazard, for neither will you read your own memoirs, nor the acts of ancient Romans and howings and the selections from books which you were observing for your old age." Meditations 3:14. I see his view as throwing down a challenge to the very act of reading. It's indifferent or worse, a distraction or degragation of life, not necessarily an enhancement. Life is short. It's better to read as little as possible and only read for self-improvement. Note that this still means that one ought to read a lot, perhaps at least relative to the typical person. And we should understand self-improvement broadly here, not just in terms of so-called self-help. A better term to use here perhaps would have been read as a way to practice spiritual exercises in the sense of pierau. You know the focus is on transforming one's spirit. That's the kind of self-improvement that matters. I see the stoic view then as having more in common with Plutarch and Emerson than many defenders of the great works. That's not to say that the great books programs, personal or institutional, should be abandoned. They are much better than the status quo and certainly make for better reading lists than what can charitably be called the good books of American public school education. Moreover, some of us will be called to master these works just as others are called to curate beautiful architecture, study physics and the works of nature or sanitize common living areas. The world is a web and we each have our role to play in it. That's a common stoke belief. Doing so is the project for some people disproportionately readers of this blog perhaps, but not for most. For most of us, consume conversations of great masters in order to be an excellent For most of us, consume conversations of great masters in order to be excellent people. Developing an aesthetic sense is important, but not enough. Of course, if you're a craftsman, consume the works of the examples that came before you. If you're a human, read about excellent humans. Of course, you should master some of the basic works of the Western cannon if you want to be educated. indeed if you are western. But don't forget that such lists are incomplete and more importantly some books are better than others. I end with another line from Marcus Aurelius. But cast away the thirst after books that you may not die murmuring but cheerfully truly and from your heart thankful to the gods. So that's the piece. I think the core argument is that so that's the piece. The core argument is that reading ought to be focused on self transformation. And as such, if you go through a list of these great books, you might you'll see works from Shakespeare, Dante, Milton, perhaps Catalus, uh Homer, of course, Plato, Emerson. What do you use to pick out there's so many you know what and what's the principle that you use to pick out perhaps some of these great books? Well, it's one that would probably drive you to start with reading the Stoics and that's that principle of what works are focused on what works are effectively spiritual exercises. What's the kind of thing one can use to transform oneself? That's uh and I think having that focus changes why one reads if you're someone who's drawn to great books programs. It's not about say mastering some list of works in order to be educated or in order to experience all the in order to experience some of the most beautiful pieces man has created. But it really is more selfish in the ancient sense. It's about, you know, being the best person one can be. And that's the focus of reading. And of course, if you have that project front of mind, being the best person one can be, being virtuous, having powerful character, having a good character and so on, that might determine how much you read to begin with. So, you know, that's an interesting question. If you're someone who's not drawn to reading or you read a lot and so on, these are the circumstances are always going to differ. But we see Marcus Aurelius reminding himself to throw away his books. Perhaps he thought he read too much or ruminated too much over what he could be reading. You know, these histories, these memoirs, uh, or in some case people suggest that he there may have been works he was writing that at the time he judged were less important than the tasks at hand. So that's of course another important consideration whether reading gets in the way of other callings other roles we have. All this being said I do think there is something to the case for a leisure reading at least for most people reading for in order to experience some of these great works. And um I do think the Stoic view is going to be consistent with the idea that some works of art really are better than others. Not just because they have the power of transformation, but because they express interesting ideas, because they're beautiful, because they have aesthetic properties, I suppose, would be the fancy way to put it. Beethovven in some sense really did create better music than Justin Bieber, what have you. um you know and defining what that sense is philosophically might be a tricky matter but it's hard for me but the stoics must I think any stoic person should believe something like that is true uh and perhaps there you know there's some interesting arguments one can be think about if you think at least from the traditional stoic point of view you have this idea of nature as ordered rational providential And there's sort of that ancient view of music having the properties it does because it maps on in some way to nature itself. It it is ordered has the same kind of sense of direction perhaps that uh the providence of nature does as well. Good music does at any rate. Uh so that's an interesting idea and worth thinking about. The philosopher Roger Scrutin, although he's not a stoic by any means, his uh ver book, A very short introduction to beauty, is a good way to um start thinking seriously about what kinds of works of art are better than others. And thinking through with other people, you know, debates over the value of books for their aesthetic properties alone. So, that's a book I'd highly recommend. At any rate, I do think there is something to be said for reading for leisure. And I mean leisure in the classical sense. Sometimes we think about leisure as time wasted. But I think by the classical sense I sort of mean using leisure, free time in a way that is intrinsically valuable. You know, it's not instrumental work. At least the part of the value perhaps the primary value of work is that it serves an instrumental purpose at least for many people. It generates resources or promotes uh or has consequences that are of value. Whereas leisure free time properly used doesn't have isn't done for the sake of anything else. It's done for its own sake. and there lies its own justification. So that's what I mean by classical sense. And although the classical stoic view might make some terminological quibbles with leisure, perhaps there is something to the idea that one, you know, even if you think about role ethics, one of the fundamental roles for us is that broad role of being a human being. And I do think that argument for art as a means of developing oneself. You know, these cliche ideas of art for the sake of self-education, self-standing, experiencing these works for themselves. So perhaps that's not just in terms of producing raw sensations but in understanding ideas, characters, aesthetic properties of these works, encountering these works as they are. That's something that's worthwhile. So you know what's the balance between reading for the sake of leisure versus reading for self transformation versus some of the many other legitimate reasons one might read? That's that's another question. And thinking about some of those other legitimate reasons, I would think that um reading can be good for the sake of community, underrated perhaps because it's a solo activity. But if you've read similar things to another person, that can be good for a relationship. And of course, it's also a selection mechanism. It's a filter of sorts. uh you're more perhaps more likely to get along with people who have similar taste uh as you in books. Of course, one can index too much on that principle, but there is something to that. And then finally, there's just reading for the sake of self-improvement and the more common sense, you know, reading to be a better software engineer, reading to be a better salesman, whatever. that kind of thing. But but set that aside. So I hope this is uh this is useful. It's still something I think through. You know, I recently went on vacation, spent most of my time reading what I would charily describe as works of leisure uh rather than works of self transformation and uh thoroughly enjoyed it, I must confess. But I do think uh but nonetheless I do think there's as I've been thinking about what to read there is this focus on okay what are those important works that might be more useful for that might be the kind of thing someone like Marcus Aurelius would jud judge positively and perhaps as someone who reads a lot that might even mean reading less or certainly reading fewer novel works but perhaps wrestling with some of the deep works I've I've read before and wrestling with them, getting value out of them instead of jumping to the next new thing or something I feel like I must read in order to be an educated person. Perfect. Let's end with another line from Marcus Aurelius. I think that's always nice. Return to something stable like that. Throw away your books. No longer distract yourself. It is not allowed but as if you were now dying. Despise the flesh is blood and bones and a network, a contexture of nerves, veins, and arteries. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. Please give us a rating on Apple Podcasts or Spotify and share it with a friend. And if you'd like to get two meditations from me on stoic theory and practice a week, just two short emails on whatever I've been thinking about as well as some of the best resources we found for practicing stoicism. Check out stoalleter.com. It's completely free. You can sign up for it and then unsubscribe at any time as you wish. If you want to dive deeper still, search Stow Stoa in the App Store or Play Store for a complete app with routines, meditations, and lessons designed to help people become more stoic. And I'd also like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. You can find more of his work at ancientlar.com. And finally, please get in touch with us. Send a message to stoasttomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback, questions, or recommendations.
