---
title: "Michael's Life Philosophy"
slug: michael-s-life-philosophy
youtube_id: bwxZgMIkAzc
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bwxZgMIkAzc
upload_date: 2026-02-24
duration: 49:20
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoa [music] Conversations. I'm Michael Trombllay. >> And I'm Caleb Monttovers. >> And today I'm gonna do something uh put myself out there a little bit. Today's episode is about my personal philosophy, how I think uh we should live or at least I think I should live. I think it probably extends to all other people as well. I wanted to do this. I thought this would be a fun exercise to do because, you know, as a historian of philosophy, spend so much time talking about what other people think. spend so much time interpreting stoicism, writing about stoicism. And that's obviously very valuable, but I wanted to take this uh some time to say, well, what do I really think? Where does that deviate from stoicism? Um, and where does it align? And I've got something here. I I try to do it in real plain language. You know, I try to make it as uncomplicated as possible. And I got something here that's a little bit different than stoicism, but this is my first time really trying to do that exercise. It was very fun and wanted to share with you, Caleb, and everybody else listening. >> Yeah, it's a good exercise. And I' I'd certainly say, you know, in the broad sense, it's probably fair to describe both of us as Stoics. Maybe you would disagree with that, but I would say the broad sense that's um fairly accurate, especially, you know, if you just know someone who knows a little bit about philosophy, but perhaps they're not in the wheats. I think that's fair. But very few people are doctrinary Stoics. And of course the uh Stokes has agreed amongst themselves and perhaps many people we've talked about this as well and say the modern stoic movement might more accurately be described as arisatilians uh in some sense. So all that's to say is I think you know even though even if one's say broadly stoic attracted to stoicism of course there are going to be differences between stoics and people often reach out struggling with particular arts of stoicism or even saying you know I'm attracted to the philosophy it's been exceptionally useful for me but I don't get this side of stoicism whether it's uh the physics or their approach to grief or what have you and I think that's totally fair and is worth thinking through uh from you know just work worth thinking through individually and together. >> I think it's a good it's a good point. Um just to reiterate what you said Caleb it's okay to learn about a philosophy follow many parts of that philosophy and still wrestle with some parts of them. I also think we kind of this comes back to that gatekeeping conversation we had a while ago. I think it's okay We're all just trying to live the examined life. If you adopt this philosophical perspective, we're all in the pursuit of truth. I remember I mentioned at a podcast once that maybe I have some more arisatilian leanings, which is not a statement that means anything to 99% of the population. You know, like if that is a relevant distinction for you, you're already pretty in deep the ancient philosophy game. Um, and somebody online was like, "Oh, Michael's not a stoic." And I was like, "This is strange. I don't think it Anyway, I'm going to say I'm going to say call out some points I disagree with the Stoics, but it doesn't mean I I agree with you that I would say I'm broadly stoic aligned um 90 90% of the way there just would not be a doctrinal stoic in uh in in every aspect. And um I always think a lot Caleb about um one thing you said about you know if if if you're debating a theory but it doesn't change how you live is the theory that important and I'll try to call out the the spots where maybe I have a distinction that maybe impact a bit about how you should live or make a bit of a difference about how you should live and welcome you challenging those or you know disagreeing as we go. Um, I also, by way of context, I'm not sure how many people have read Spinosa's ethics. Terribly confusing book. My my PhD supervisor, he did Spinosza and the Stoics. Like, that was his area of specialization. And I took a Spinosa class with him, and I was like, this is the guy to take it with. And it was good, but it was so so challenging and confusing. But one thing I really like about Spinosa's ethics is he used what's called the um geometric method. Um, >> I can't say, but that's what it's called. I think I know what you're talking about, but he has a list of um Vickenstein and his tractus does something similar, right? A list of >> Yeah, it's basically list of a list of axioms >> and then everything's kind of built off those and I try to do that here. I'm going to start with kind of three axioms that I'm not going to argue and then then I try to build everything else off other things, off other arguments and build up to these kind of practical implications. So, um I'll kick things off. I'll maybe do them do this one section at a time and then we can uh jump in. So this is my attempt to articulate how people should live my philosophy of life. First I start with a broadly ancient udeonistic framework. So this view of life as being about flourishing. So um premise one some lives are objectively better than others. That's something that I believe is the kind of reject rejection of relativism or nihilism. I just think there are better or worse ways to live and you can make true claims about true statements about those kinds of things. It's not like, well, that's just your opinion or nothing really matters anyway. No. Um, my life can go better or worse. Um, you know, even even to have debate that is you're pretty deep in philosophy to kind of debate that, but that's something that I I I take as as being true. Second, um, what defines a good life is determined by facts about our nature. what kind of thing we are and how well we align with those facts. So this is an endorsement of teology and teology is the view that things have a certain ends certain purpose in some extent and so first point is that lives can go better or worse and then what determines whether your life goes better or worse is how well you live in accordance with or fulfill facts about what kind of thing you are. That's my second claim. Um and then my third claim is that aligning ourselves with our nature. So trying to live in accordance with those facts is a craft. It's something we do and like any other craft, it can be done more or less skillfully. So I can I can do a good job of building a life that fulfills my purpose or function and I can do a bad job of that. And and people have a variety of skills in that area. Those are my first three three claims. Um, want me to keep going or jump in? What do you think is the best way? >> I think that Well, maybe I'll just restate that in a different in a different way just to uh make sure I'm tracking along. I think I like the first the first premise if you want to almost state these in a uh negative way. It's a rejection of what you could call relativism, subjectivism, nihilism, whatever. Just that some lives are better than others objectively speaking. And then the second one would be a um it's a little bit harder to put in the negative way, but on the positive conception, it's that if you want to determine how to have a better life, then you look at the kind of thing you are and its nature. And so instead of perhaps I would take that to be a rejection perhaps of utilitarianism or something like this where you find values outside of whatever you are just there's like values floating around and you're trying to maximize them or achieve them like pleasure. It's linked up with our with our nature and it's linked up with what you are as an individual as opposed [clears throat] to perhaps some more uh different forms of life that might just say maximize pleasure. It doesn't really matter. questions about who you are, what you are, doesn't really matter. And then the last one would be you can be better or worse at achieving your nature. So that's a it's in a way a kind of rejection of fatalism, I suppose, right? It's that you can live better. It's a craft uh in a certain sense. You aren't just destined to be, you know, something with a bad nature, something with a good nature, what have you. >> Yeah. Yeah, it's kind of like an like a rejection of this idea that some people are just born, you know, bad at being humans and some people are born at being good at being humans. And I don't think that's the case. It's there's this kind of affirmation of our agency in that. >> Cool. >> Um yeah, I think that that lands. So then some other things that come from these. So because of three because you know living in accordance with nature is this our nature is a kind of a craft or skill like any other craft or skill we're able to train ourselves over time and dedicated practice to live more skillfully and therefore live better. I think this is maybe the same piece we were saying before is the real affirmation of agency. If this wasn't the case then we would not have agency in living a good life. It's that that kind of fatalism piece that you raised. Then another premise. So we've we've established this kind of agency to influence our lives or at least I believe that now because because we can train ourselves to be better to be more in accordance with our nature and what makes a good life is how much we're in accordance with our nature. So then again we have that we have that significant agency over whether we achieve a good life or not. And then because we have that agency is premise number six. The most important task in our lives above any other passion or interest is directing ourselves towards the project of living the best possible life. So this is a kind of a riskilian argument and I don't mean it it's not an anti-Stoic argument. It's just it's something Aristotle talks about in the Kamakian ethics which is that uh there's nothing we can want to pursue above having a good life. If we did that it would be irrational. Um a good everything we do is in pursuit of a good life. So we have we have a degree of agency to do lots of things. If we have a degree of agency to live a good life, then everything else that that is the thing that it makes the most sense to get dedicate our energy towards that it makes the most sense to prioritize that above other things. Nothing else really could usurp that. Um that that's the that's claim number six. >> Yeah. So that's missed the framework. >> Go ahead. Yeah, I think that's that's a good way to put it. It's a just a udonistic framework. Many of the Greek Greco Roman philosophers philosophies would uh be humming along to this. >> Yeah, everybody everybody's nodding. Nobody's throwing tomatoes yet. Um and then the next part I think then we add in facts about human nature because we made all these claims. Like if I summarize the first part, it's like you can live a good life. It depends on what kind of thing you are, but you can do a better or worse job of becoming a good version of that kind of thing. The next question for me then is what kind of thing are you? And um so premise number seven, because a good life depends on what kind of thing we are. To succeed at our craft, we need to know our nature. And our nature is complex. We're not just one kind of thing. Um, and I think that all of my breaking from the Stoics comes at this point. This claim that we are not just one kind of thing. We are a complex thing or our nature, our nature is complex. Sorry, I have some people walking outside. >> No worries. I can't hear it. Neighbors coming home. >> Yeah, our nature is complex. and and um you know I wish I had a better argument for it but it just seems to me intuitively true and I'll flesh it out a bit with the these other premises. So premise 8, the most important part of our nature, I believe, is the rational part of ourselves, our prohibis, our capacity for choice. I think that's part of who we are, part of part of what we are. And I think it's the most important part. But premise 9 contra the stoics. We are by our essential nature also social creatures who live in bodies. We are not just our mind. We are not just our prohosis. And that leads me to the last piece. So a good life has a hierarchy of goods. By far the most important is perfecting our reason and our choices. But extreme deprivation in other areas is actually bad for us. It's bad to be in solitary confine confinement. It's bad to live in extreme poverty. Um these bad circumstances I agree with the stoics that because there's a hierarchy of good, these bad circumstances can sometimes be instrumentally good. So sometimes I could, you know, be in solitary confinement and that turns me towards a life of philosophy. And so I I could I could take a minus two and get a plus 10 and that's fine. I come out ahead. Um but that doesn't make them not bad. They're still kind of um impeding or harming parts of my nature. Physical deprivation, social deprivation, social hardship, physical hardship in extreme manners. And um yeah, I just think those things I'm breaking with the stoic act uh axiology and value system by saying I think those things are kind of bad. I think they're less bad than being a bad person, but I think they're kind of bad. Yeah. So this I suppose the central question for a lot of the these life philosophies especially the Greek and Roman ones is you know what is our nature then? And then your claim is that with the stoics you believe our prohibis our capacity for choice is what's essential for living a good life. But it can also part of our nature involves other things being good or bad for us than merely our you know the decisions we make through life. So, in a way, perhaps you might say something like someone may still be unhappy even if they're virtuous. I don't know if you go if you made that claim in particular. >> I don't think I go that far. Maybe I need to break this apart. Maybe the view is that I think it's necessary for a good life to be a good person. H it's probably sufficient but all you have to do is introduce this idea of degrees of happiness which the stoics don't do right like yeah is the is the sage on the on the torture rack happy? Yes. Is the sage at home with their loving family surrounded by you know eating a turkey dinner happier? Yes, because they have less of these bad things. So I I think I'm kind of I kind of not that much different uh necessary and sufficient for happiness and maybe I wouldn't say sufficient maybe I would say sufficient in you know 99% of circumstances and you can make these kind of thought experiments otherwise but you know uh if you're kind of you know chained up in a basement does it really matter you know how much you align your will with nature at that point and I think even the stoics acknowledge that about kind of you know at that point it's better to just stop eating and drinking and just kill yourself. Um so maybe I should have maybe I should have thought a little bit more carefully about sufficiency and necessity of happiness. I think it's really really important gets us I would say it's necessary. I don't think you can be happy without being a good person. I would say it's maybe sufficient probably some extreme thought experiments where you could disprove that. But then I also introduced this idea degrees of happiness. you can just be happier with more good things and there's other good things besides your character. >> Gotcha. So I mean it's very similar to the last view that we talked about in on ends where I believe the view by antiochist is that a virtue is necessary and sufficient for a happy life but as you say you can have more or less happiness. which it sounds like is what what you're saying. >> Yeah. And then I try to get into here are some of the practical I would say that's accurate. Yes. And then there's some practical implications of that. But any more on that part before I move forward? >> Well, yeah, I definitely want to get to the practical implications because it's so similar. And I guess that's why we opened up saying we're broad maybe broadly stoic, but perhaps that come maybe that we'll see whether that's overstating it or not. >> Yeah. Yeah. So let me get to the let me get to the full implications of this run through the rest of my premises. So pract I I I I then say some agreements with the stoics are some things that don't break with the stoics here. So because the prohirus is our most important part of ourselves and it's you know pro it's necess I certainly believe it's necessary and probably sufficient for a good life. Modern society vastly underestimates the importance of character for a good life and vastly overestimates the importance of physical goods and status. I think that part of part of a philosophical education is learning to turn your attention towards your character and turn your attention towards other mistaken conceptions of the good life that distract from um impede your produ your uh pursuit of the good life or in some ways are um contradictory or conflict with the good life. you know, like the pursuit of money at the expense of being a good person or the expense of um you know, showing showing your character um to be to be a virtuous one. So that's an agreement with the Stoics. Because of that, um I also think that because of that last idea that um we overestimate uh the importance of physical goods and status. I think modern society vastly underestimates the amount of agency we have in improving our own lives and overestimates our fragility. And so this under this underestimation of our of our agency and this overestimation of our fragility, it leads to unnecessary stress, anxiety, anger, feelings of helplessness and sadness. So a lot of our stress comes from thinking I need I need something external to me to go a certain way to be happy. I need to get this thing. I need to own this thing. Need this person to like me. They need to date this person to be happy. And so we feel very fragile. We feel very stressed and anxious about our lives. Our character is very much up to us and we have high agency. Um and then because of because of the idea there's this hierarchy of goods. It is possible although not easy to have a great life in terrible physical and social circumstances. Um you can be happy on the torture rack. So here this is where I talked about sufficiency. You can be happy on the torture rack. It would just require a high degree of excellence and you would be better off not on the rack. Um that's that's the part where I disagree with the stoics. But the first part is that I I that agreement is that it's possible to have a great life in terrible circumstances. Yeah, that's I think that's interesting. And I think um that's uh I mean certainly in a way more intuitive of course like any thing in philosophy stoicism can begin with these intuitive claims you know and then you end up with the radical side of uh the philosophy. You know you just focus on what's on under your control. You know, you start at something intuitive like that, then end up with the idea that nothing matters at all but what's under your control effectively, which is um or to be more precise, you know what, nothing matters for your happiness as it were. But of course that cuts against other common sense ideas like you know having a chronic illness isn't bad for you or I think just the intuitive sense that there are parts of life that are tragic right that does have some and they involve misfortune life is not fair they involve serious hardship and it's perhaps the stoic stoic view doesn't fully acknowledge that um of course there are things stoics can say but I think that's a fair response a fair uh response to the stoic certainly I when I get down to it I take a step back that's easy it's easy to say that this is an arisatilian position well that's one way to take it another step is it's kind of just a rejection of stoic binary like the stoics they loved that that binary you're either an idiot or you're a sage you're either totally vicious or you're virtuous. You're either straight or you're bent. This is the way they would talk about things all the time. And it's a kind of a it's kind of a introduction. I think we we get so much more if we just introduce this idea of degrees. Um you know the the the there's degrees of progression. You can be a better or worse person without being a perfect. there's degrees of happiness even once you've achieved happiness and um or even once you've achieved a good character. You know, the the the person on the torture rack has less of a great life um than the person who is just as virtuous but is at home and you know with their family and um you know comfortable in comfortable comfortably fed and um you know supported not on a torture rack. Um and so that's just that's just a recognition of degrees. I think your point which is like you know pro there probably is a there probably is a nuanced stoic argument that shows the logical inconsistency of that and once you introduce this idea of degrees we probably lose something in the theory. Um but that's really that's really it and I I'll get to that point. That's one of my last points just this recognition of tragedy I think is something if the stories could just recognize some tragedy um without saying any sort of recognition of tragedy or sadness is ignorance is for me a kind of um that's something I still wrestle with. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, let's uh let's move on then to some of these uh disagreements and then we can reflect on them. >> Yeah. So, here are my disagreements with the stoics that come from this. So because of premise 9, which is that we are also social creatures who live in bodies, not everyone has the same degree of agency in pursuing a in pursuing a good character. So it's easy, it's easier for nourished, socially supported people to learn about stoicism and philosophy. I'm sure you can always have the the the anecdotal counterargument um about you know the person who went through terrible things and it caused some sort of paradigm shift for them but we talk a lot Caleb about stoicism as this kind of craft requires attention or requires focus you just have more time for those things um if you're better off now being better off there's obviously these counter examples better off is not necessarily good for the development of your character I agree with that stoic premise, you know, having a life of luxury and leisure can can turn you into the kind of person who feels upon goods or becomes very a very shallow person or becomes a very kind of greedy person. That's fine. But I just think it's all things considered, there's there's some circumstances where it's very hard to practice stoicism. It's very hard to practice your attention. That's that's that's one disagreement I have. Another disagreement which we've already hit on is because because we're b we have bodies and are social creatures, extreme situations of social and physical hardship are bad. And I'm I'm not talking about a mean boss or bully. I think it's useful to practice uh questioning our narratives about a conflict at work, for example. But terrible prison conditions, torture, extreme poverty, long-standing emotional abuse, these are bad things. Um these are things that harm us holistically as humans. They're contrary to our nature. Um, another thing that I believe, um, because of those last two things, we also have ethical obligations to help other people both to eliminate the bad and to raise their agency to pursue life in accordance with their nature. So, I think my view is more focused on the floor rather than the ceiling at this point. I think it's something like a capabilities approach. Um so we we want to help people live wholesome lives where they have the capability and agency to build their character. Um and the capable capabilities approach it's nusbalm argues for this. It's a my understanding it's an approach to human welfare that focuses on the actual capabilities of humans to achieve a flourished life rather than you know access to resources or legal rights. And the basic idea there is we want to promote people's capability to flourish. I should if I have, you know, additional money, if I have the additional capability to do this, I want to support people that are in too bad of a circumstance to flourish intellectually, to flourish um in terms of their character. If they have their limit, their agency reduced by, as you said, by chronic illness, by extreme poverty, by uh being stuck in a situation of abuse, we have an obligation to to help that. And then also because of though because you know uh physical and social hardship is bad and and things can reduce our agency in pursuing a good life. It's appropriate to feel sad emotions. Sometimes we can grieve as a recognition of the bad things that have happened to people. Um it's like anything else. It's about finding the middle ground or finding the correct time to apply those labels. We don't want to do that too often, but I think there are things that can happen that are sad and that is not ignorance. Um, and I'm fine with never with with never achieving a stage of sagehood where I don't feel sad about, you know, things that deserve it, so to speak, >> right? Yeah. Cool. Okay. Uh I mean overall I think these uh it's interesting you say just this arisatilianism well it's a a mix I think just like the view of antiochus of some of the lines from the stoics and traditional riatilianism because I I do think traditionally or virtue is not sufficient for a good life. >> Yeah maybe I'm not [clears throat] an expert in a by any means but I mean go ahead. I mean there's some disagreement about whether or not ver character is sufficient. On some readings they take it as sufficient. Some readings some some people take it as sufficient. But you know if you think of Epictitius as kind of a cynical stoic then I think I'm like a stoic stoical arisatilian or I'm an aristoilian stoic. It's like if it's this long spectrum, I'm I'm somewhere I'm not fully arisatilian because I I think I do take a harder line. And I think maybe that harder line comes from this like minimal state rather than this maximal state. Like Aristotle talks about, you know, if you're a good person, it's better to be super super rich because then you can do even more super good things. And I think there's this kind of maybe maybe there's this view of of just these kind of minimal conditions you need to have. I don't know. I haven't really thought about that. I haven't thought about in that way exactly. But I think if you think of it like a spectrum, it's it's somewhere in between those two. I'm not just like full of I think there's some points of emphasis the stoics really get right. Yeah, definitely. So nine the or sorry nine 13 is sort of interesting. feel like the 13, you know, premise 13 from Tromblé where he states not everyone has the same degree of agency in pursuing a good character. That I wonder if the Stoics would say because they of course they say things like it's harder to be virtuous if you are you know Rousonius Rufus we just talked about he says it's hard to be virtuous if you're exceptionally affluent. So, but at the same time, they do want to say that everyone in a sense, you know, because they're rational, they have agency, and they're responsible for their character. But nonetheless, it can be perhaps more difficult for some people, easier for others to be virtuous. And I I think they're committed to that. at least mison Rufus is when he says things like you know it's better to be uh live this kind of life because it's more conducive for the life of virtue than this other kind of life. So I wonder how much uh they would disagree I think they would disagree with the use of agency specifically but would they disagree at the fundamental point of of that? What do you think? I mean, I think you're right that Masonius would So, yeah, I think you're correct that anybody who taught anybody stoicism recognize that some people are better or worse at taking in the lessons depending on their life circumstances. Epictitus talks about this. Mason Rufus talks about this. So, there's a kind of a factual recognition. Then there's this kind of uh doctrine recognition. And I kind of struggle with this idea in stoicism in general which is this this idea that well if virtue is good and I can stop you from achieving virtue or I can limit your can make it harder for you to achieve virtue. Haven't I just harmed you in some way? Um and I think from a doctrine perspective the stoics have to reject that claim that that somebody's been harmed. But I don't know how they reject that claim if if they also admit that I've just made it harder for you to become a good person, which is goodness for you, right? >> Yeah. I suppose they say you can't stop me from becoming virtuous, but you can make it more difficult. >> But that's not that wouldn't be a harm. But then yeah, maybe you'd say, "Yeah, but I think then the you doesn't that doesn't bother me that they say that's not a harm, but I could see at the very least is decision relevant, which they would agree with, too. You know, you don't want to make it harder for people to be virtuous." And this connects to your later point. Perhaps that also means you want to make it easier for people to live uh a good life. That makes that means you want to define some floor perhaps where that people should meet and help them help them reach it. Um I mean that connects to the floor argument. I'm getting kind of consequentialist at this point. You know, does the stoic's job become to maximize the amount of virtue across the world? I want to I think I want to avoid the consequentialism. But I think in in terms of if we are still creatures, what does what does my socialness compel me to do? Well, it compels me to help you in some way pursue your your good life. Maybe not at the expense of my good life. Maybe I don't treat you as an equal, but if I'm a if I have a sister, I want to help my sister have a good life. I don't want to help her do terrible things that harm herself. And I don't want I I want to help her live a good life. And if I live in a society, which I do, if I I'm I'm grounding kind of our social obligations in that idea that you can influence the quality of other people's lives, which I think this account gets us, where I think the the Stoics have a hard view of that where they talk about fulfill your role. And then I feel maybe I just need to study more stoicism, but I feel like you get into a bit of an infinite regress about well, you know, why does it matter if I'm a good brother, right? Why does it matter? I mean, what's kind of the grounding of that if I have no cap capacity to help or harm my my sister, you know? >> Yeah. Yeah. Well, they um perhap maybe one way to state it would be or one way I'm I'm thinking about it is there are different levels perhaps of value. First, there's the or different you can almost think of it as there's a binary then there's a continuum. Maybe you wouldn't think about it this way, but you're living a happy life or you're not. And then there are happier lives if once you've made it into the happy happy happy land. And then of course there's also the related idea that uh if you're not happy there are less happy lives, you can be more or less unhappy. So the most important perhaps where you're where you're the focus on when you talk about the focus being on capabilities or giving people the agency to live a good life, it's on making that first jump between unhappiness to happiness. And then within once you've made it to living a happy life perhaps I don't want to say it's less important but the focus on obligations becomes or you know if everyone lived a happy life there wouldn't be such uh an obligation to make people you know meet that bar as it were. It would perhaps your obligations look differently. Does that is that sort of how you're thinking about it or is that is that a little a skew? I mean, that makes the the first part made sense to me. I think we lost the second part, and I don't want this to necessarily descend into like Michael Banks' head against the concept of indifference again, which I feel like can happen once every five episodes or something. I mean, I think you're right that or at least you hit on it that the Stoics would say, "Well, just some things are preferable, you know, like it's prefer you prefer, you know, you want to help your want to help your sister live the kind of life she prefers to live, which has facts about her physical nature and her social nature and things like this. Or you want to help other people live preferable kind of lives. We just don't want to call them good lives because you can't help somebody live a good life um because they've got to do that themselves. They've got to become a good person. Uh I think that's kind of this the stoic play and my play is just no I can help somebody become a good person. I can mentor them. I can teach them. I think Epictitus was helping people. I think he was enabling people to become more virtuous. I think he's helping people today in his writings. Um, and that just that just I basically when I when you open the door to the idea that I can I can make somebody unhappy, then I also open the door to I can make somebody happy. And then it pulls in a lot of common sense implications about recognizing tragedy and like what ground, you know, what our social obligations to other people are. Um, and I think if you if you pull those things in, you know, you give that you give that tiny little space in the stoic theory, you lose some nice, you know, you lose some of the nice extremism of stoicism. You lose some of the nice you lose those moments where Epictitus is like, well, whatever. Chop off my head, but you'll never, you know, impact my soul. You'll never control me. you lose some of that because now my worldview it's kind of like uh you know I really don't want you to drop off my head. That would be really bad. But it would be less bad than me, you know, caving. Uh it would be much less bad than me uh betraying my family. You know, if if that's the choice I'm given, I'll take that choice. Um you lose a to me is is the much more common sensical answer. Um and it it it has a bunch of common sense downstream implications um again around that point of tragedy and around that point of helping other people. >> Yeah. Yeah, that makes sense. That makes sense to me. I suppose you know one always can come back with uh the ideas of indifference or perhaps thinking about you know there's always a stoic challenge to the other Greek philosophies in terms of you know we found something that's good regardless of circumstance namely virtue you know this cho choiceworthy ability but you're proposing that there are other goods perhaps. But how do you explain you how do you explain that? How do you account for that? In addition to the value of making excellent choices, in addition to the value of virtue, you know, you've got whe whether it's health or uh some level of physical ability, uh social standing, uh whatever it is, you know, what makes those things good in a way that's somehow disconnected from uh reason for high resus. Yeah. Does that make sense? as a as a challenge. >> Yeah, that's the stoic like I'm not doing basically I'm not doing something new here. Uh kind of uh ancient schools were always trying to put other types of good on the table. Um and then the what I was understanding your argument to be was that yeah why are these other goods so kind of like bad or worse or circumstantial? Is that is that what you meant at the end there? >> Yeah, I suppose so. I think it's it's maybe it wasn't stated very well. So maybe I'll I'll try again. But I think the the Stokes case is strongest when they look at something like pleasure and they'll say, "Yeah, intuitively pleasure is good. We like to experience pleasure rather than not." But then we'll think about, oh, well, there are some pleasure that have no goodness in them at all. Whether it's a pleasure of the sadist or even maybe even uh trivial pleasures that don't contribute to a life well-lived at all. It's not just that you know that the there is some amount of pleasure there and that either usurp by the value of something else. It's that those things have no goodness in it. Therefore virture itself can't be good. It's got to be something else or at least there's got to be some other principle that explains the value of pleasure. And then they make that I think they make that move for uh essentially all other things uh all other possible values and say you know that's why what essentially matters is choice. Yeah that pleasure is preferable but what matters is how we use it. You know it's likewise wealth. wealth is preferable, but we know that if someone's exceptionally wealthy, they can in real in a real sense ruin their life with that wealth. Someone who's poor can still live an excellent life. Uh, you know, we talk about humans being a social creature and it's certainly true that they're probably few harms worse than just absolute, you know, social rejection or exile. um being completely alienated from the people you love. But the Stoics of course explicitly say you can live well even in exile and probably there are you know we can think of cases where people were able to do that. So and what grounds that you know they're still able to make good choices with whatever they were given. uh and uh I think that's uh I suppose that's the stoic stoic line which is maybe just a way to sort of expand that point of you know these other things we think are good they're not always good those other things we think are bad they're not always bad what matters is how we use them in the end and that's I guess the common sense way to put the stoic stoic view my philosophy of tromblism here I think can account for all those anecdotes or all those situations. Um, going back to your example, so the example of the sadist, the person who gets pleasure, I think that is just what I'm saying is the thing that the stoics reject is that person who gets pleasure from hurting somebody, it is a good thing that is then overruled by an abundance of a bad thing and a bad a bad thing more bad. And so it's like, well, why is why, you know, some people with pleasure can live bad lives, some people um some people that are exiled can live good lives. And it's like, yeah, because um I don't know. It's like it's like you've got kind of three income streams or something. And like I if I if I get a lot of money from my main job, doesn't matter that my side hustle doesn't bring in any any money. And if I get little tiny amount of money from my side hustle at the expense of getting fired from my job, well then that's probably a net bad thing. It's this kind of it's this kind of math we're doing. I guess it's that type difference between preferred and good that I I'm suspicious that the Stoics make and they make it on the grounds of identity. We are human. We are rational. So only reason is good. Uh and then we're we're irrational things that happen to be in a body. So we prefer our body to be uh comfortable. And I guess I'm just like objecting to that. Can't you just have kind of three? Can't all these things be good but at in vastly different degrees? And so um you know if I thought experimented this the other way, you know, um is is could you tell a little white lie or something? could you do a little tiny minuscule bad thing to like um protect your body or your wealth or your you know could the calculus sometimes go the other way and I think it sometimes can I think sometimes it's okay to do kind of bad things sometimes those trade-offs are in the table maybe that's where maybe that's where I go too far because I want to talk about uh I I want to say that virtue is still necessary to be happy Um, but yeah, I guess my original point is why can't why can't they just all be in the same category bucket? We're just talking about dollars versus cents here, right? Why what's doesn't that just explain all the circumstances you raised? >> Yeah, I think it it definitely could. I suppose maybe um [clears throat] the the dollar if you think about dollars and cents then you think well everything's on the same scale and that's easy to do with dollars and perhaps also if you're say a utilitarian and you think the only good thing is pleasure then you can say you know if I'm going to all I want to do is maximize pleasure minimize pain I can just rank things by how pleasurable or painful they are. Of course, there are objections to that. Maybe you think you can't measure pleasure and pain that tightly, but at least in theory, you're sort of in a dollar and cents type world. But if you think, oh, there's pleasure, there's health, there's social standing, there's honor, there's aesthetic values, uh if you have sort of a list of objective goods, or maybe say our human nature is complex. We've got all these different things that can make a life go better or worse. then that there is a question about well how do we make judgments between these maybe you can't I think maybe uh maybe uh there there just some there's just going to be some complexity some uncertainty baked into your model of the world that might be all right but uh I think that is a kind of question for those those views >> yeah I get your point it's not all along the same the same spectrum yeah and So I I did want to well it could be along the same spectrum but it's you know it doesn't necessarily have to be I guess is the point. Yeah. So that any anything else zooming out to a high level cuz I I'll just continue to fight against this preferred indifference versus good but much less good question. I think my break if I if I had to summarize this was look I I think the radical that we are just that we are a rational thing. Um and so other stuff isn't isn't good or bad because of that. I I I make a break there. I'm still really on the stoic ends of things but I make a break there and I think it allows a lot of the goods of stoicism. So we should we should continue we overestimate the importance of physical goods and status in modern society. We underestimate our agency and our we overestimate our fragility which leads to stress, anxiety, anger and feelings of helplessness. It's possible to have a great life even in terrible physical circumstances and social circumstances. Those are a lot of the benefits of stoicism and I believe those to be true. But then I think we just get a couple more common sense. I think this break smuggles in a couple more common sense. It's like we're smuggling in some of the good at a minimum amount of bad. And I think it's makes more sense. It's more compelling to me. Um which is that some extreme situations you can call bad. Some extreme situations some things stop people's ability to pursue a good life or limit or impede it. And we have a kind of obligation to like raise people to a certain floor of agency so they can pursue philosophy, so they can pursue these questions of the exam in life. And hard to do that if somebody's, you know, if an 11year-old starving to death, it's hard for them to do that. Or if somebody doesn't have access to a basic education or um, you know, is in a uh is in kind, you know, abusive situation. They don't really have the capacity to do that. And then some things are just kind of sad sometimes. That's okay. They they shouldn't ruin your life. They're not tragedies that you that you know should be long-term passions, but there's some things that are kind of sad. And that's that's where I stand. Part of the reason we do this philosoph we do this work is to, you know, update those view, change those views. This view is obviously heavily influenced by the stoicism I've studied and read. Maybe it will change as I continue to study more. Maybe it will become more nuanced. But yeah, that's where that's where I'm sitting right now. And it was a fun exercise. I would I would encourage other people to do it as well. Um, it was it's fun to kind of put your money where your mouth is and, you know, really clarify what you believe. >> Yeah, definitely a good exercise. I like the how you highlight the question of our nature and um how some of these practical upshots follow from that question. Certainly, I think it does seem like just saying we're simply rational animals is too perhaps too reductive in a way. Of course, you want to say we're or you know, saying we're rational is too reductive. You know, we're rational animals. As you say, we're social. We have a body. And uh although the Stoics think everything's a body in many senses, they perhaps underrate just being a physical organism. That's not essential to uh or at least ordinary common sense ideas about what it would take for a organism to live a good life or uh they reject. So, um, it's it's really that premise number seven where I think a lot of the the divergence begins or you could say the divergence and the agreement, you know, that emphasis on reason, but also this idea that there are other aspects uh of our nature that determine how we live. >> Uh, no. Awesome. Well, summarized. Thank you. >> Cool. Yeah, thanks for doing this. All right. Let us know what you think, y'all. And uh maybe perhaps we'll do another one of these uh when you've changed your mind in a few years. >> Yeah, I I'm interested if people agree or disagree and then we'll um we'll see how see how things change in a couple years. Totally. Thanks, Gil. Cool.
