---
title: "Musashi’s Book of Five Rings: The Ground Book (Episode 218)"
slug: musashi-s-book-of-five-rings-the-ground-book
episode_number: 218
youtube_id: zAGaF0IPXPg
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zAGaF0IPXPg
upload_date: 2026-01-13
duration: 57:16
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stowa Conversations. My name is Caleb Monttoveros >> and [music] I'm Michael Tromblé. >> And today we're going to be discussing the first book or a chapter from the five rings, sometimes called the book of five rings by Miiamoto Mousashi. It's a uh classic, I suppose, in the warrior zen catalog, if you will. I don't know about you, but even in my uh one of the jiu-jitsu gyms I go to, there's a Mousashi quote on the wall. And uh I think that's probably true for many different martial arts. I asked chat JPT if that quote was legitimate because I did not recognize it from my work and I don't know if it's a legitimate quote that's on the wall of that gym. So that's a sort of a funny aside and perhaps that's a similarity that uh Mishashi has in common with the Stoics and we'll get get into more similarities but I think uh the the sort of warrior Zen type tradition is I think it's a good way to get into some of the philosophy of Zen through a concrete craft I suppose. So that's that's one reason why I wanted to to chat about it. It's a book I read a while back. Um, and now we're sort of revisiting. So, we're going to be discussing the the first book. That's the uh ground book of of this work, the first ring, if you will. Yeah, I was really excited for this one. Great topic, Caleb. I surprisingly have not read this. So, I grew up in a martial arts family and have had the book of Five Rings recommended to me a lot. Um, I haven't got around to reading it and it's kind of intimidating and this was a good opportunity to dig into it. I think part of the reason why it's so popular in the martial arts space or the you know the kind of we wouldn't call ourselves warriors today but that kind of space is uh there there's a large part of martial arts culture that's about you do sport for self-improvement or do martial arts for self-improvement. That's what differentiates it from a sport or a hobby. It's about cultivation of the self. And then um and we'll get into this in that this book, but it's kind of about these themes. It's about somebody who learned how to fight and then fighting taught them about how to live. And there was these these other kind of uh lessons that come from, as you said, the mastery of a specific craft, specifically the fighting craft. Um, and so I we we've just read the first book so far, or at least just me, but it was it was okay, this is why this is popular, because not only are you getting insight from somebody who's obviously an amazing fighter, we'll get into bit to Mashi's life in a moment, but um, it's it's a it's about those explicit connections about what becoming an excellent fighter taught him, about how to live um, and about how to be excellent in in other domains of life. And that's a big part of martial arts culture. um at least and I think that's a that's a Japanese influence when I say martial arts culture. Uh you know my family's has a karate background and a Japanese jiu-jitsu background before Brazilian jiu-jitsu and so I think that is an explicit explicit Japanese influence coming from this tradition. >> Yeah, absolutely. So we'll talk about the uh book connected with some themes in stoicism and just share our general thoughts about it. Um but before we do that we should should share talk a little bit about Mishashi's life when this was written and so on. So it's probably written around 1645 or so and uh Miiamoto Mousashi wrote this at the end of his life in his 60s. It was completed about a decade after another work we talked about, the unfettered mind. And I think it can be thought of sort of in a similar manner to that book. Per they're certainly related. Um so do check out that episode if you haven't got the chance to yet and you're interested in this topic. So Mousashi is sort of reflecting after a life of you know being a samurai living the life of a warrior. He fought 60 duels or so, was undefeated, and uh reflecting on lessons he can share about the sort of like the concrete strategy of combat, but also some of these ideas about strategy as a whole, uh mindset as a whole, and uh you know, what does mastering one craft teach you about the set of all other crafts? So you certainly can read it as an instruction manual for combat if you like, but most people today read it as something larger. You know, it's really about mastering yourself. Um really about uh you know, this this this specific version of Zen as realized in combat. So I think just right off the bat that connects to the idea that philosophy is something lived and practiced not uh not merely uh I you know we don't have philosophy books typically connected so tightly to a given craft like this though the Zen Zen tradition is is certainly a uh is a counter example to that but it's not as you know you just think of Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance. But uh this that's not uh something we see as often in other modern western approaches. >> Yeah. And then so a bit of historical context there. I I tried to just look this up now. Um but many of the duels that Mashi had were to the death. I I don't think I don't want to say all of them because I don't I don't historically know about all of them, but you know, these are like any of them like cowboy shootouts or something like these are one-on-one the highest possible stake engagement. So when we talk about 60 duels, it's not like he played 60 games of basketball and nobody beat him. It was these kind of moments of extreme focus, highest consequence possible and then execution and and victory in those contexts. So, somebody who's mental fortitude um unparalleled, you couldn't really look for analogies to that in modern sport or anything. It's just the the consequences just aren't the same. So, that's one bit of context. And then just just exciting. It's like it's pretty it's pretty cool. And then another another bit is you were just talking about this explicit connection between philosophy and craft. I I was just reading Masonius Rufus today, another stoic, and it was making me he he has this part where he talks about how philosophy is in some way kind of fundamental or kind of a essential part of a a human life because it's the only thing we don't like I always use the example of scuba diving like only the scuba diver knows how to scuba dive. Only the painter knows how to paint. I would be an idiot if I thought I could paint. But you can learn how to live well by doing other things. like other people besides the philosopher know how to live well. And we'll get into this in the episode, but maybe that has to do with this idea of like the way or the path that all that connects all these things, but it was making me think of what you were saying, Caleb, which is this idea that maybe living well or the philosophical pursuit of a good life is in some way fundamental such that the pursuit of any other craft gives you information about it or gets you better at it. And that's that's hence this pursuit or hence this this framing by Mashi of I've become this expert at at being a swordsman. I've become expert at being a warrior. And that makes me an authority on on living. Makes me an authority on philosophy because you can't you can't become an expert at those things without understanding something about the way the world works basically because philosophy is is more fundamental. Um so you learn about it by by doing any of the less fundamental things I guess. Um what do you think about that? Does that does that make sense? >> Yeah, I think so. These uh I think um it's it's certainly true that one can take a given craft and either develop skills or principles that you find apply to other areas in a domain. I think there's oft you know you can almost think about approaching a given problem by developing general skills or specific ones and move them move in both directions from the specific to the general from the general to the specific and if you think about philosophy in particular I think it it can help you move between those two domains because often what you're pulling out are some of the more general principles or at least you know mindsets if you think about dispositions or a self-improve movement, you know, just being able to handle. You think about the general skill of mastering uh impressions, how you respond to impressions. That's something you can apply, >> you know, if you in your day-to-day existence across relationships, career, and uh there of course going to be there's a whole world of uh details that make make the all the difference in these domains. But certain skills are going to uh be useful in all of them. You know, recognizing when you're wrong, having that that sense of, you know, when to listen to your intuition, when to take a step back and pause and so on. So, I think I think in general that's that's certainly true. >> Yeah, those are good those are good concrete examples. And it also kind of speaks to why a lot of people will come to something like the idea of the dichotomy of control on their own, right? or they'll come to a lot of I uh they'll say things that sound very stoic and people will often ask, "Oh, was this person a stoic or was that person a stoic?" And no, they weren't. But maybe they maybe their life, you know, they're not a stoic in that they don't follow this philosophical tradition explicitly, but maybe in their life they came to uncover some of these similar truths. I think you provided some good concrete examples of those. >> Cool. So this first book, the ground book, uh we have five rings. Ground, water, fire, wind, void. We start with ground. That's sort of the foundation. It's about strategy as such. Uh Bushashi does talk about combat, but it's it's I think it's broader. So it is the introduction to the rest of this work where he lays the groundwork for the upcoming chapters on adaptability, fighting, other schools and traditions and then this last chapter void which is really a Zen takeaway if you will. This is a book we'll be focusing on the ground book and uh of course we're not we should flag that neither of us are Mashi experts. We don't have the same mastery of the man or his thought as we do of stoicism. So, uh though of course we've read the work and done a decent amount of preparation. >> Um you know, >> we might say something silly is what you're >> Yeah, we might say something silly and if we do, please correct us on it. >> But I think many ideas here are worth pulling out, especially for, you know, anyone interested in the philosophy of philosophical life. The the Zen approach is different. It's a different angle I think of coming at many of the same things. I don't want to say that it's ultimately the same tradition of course of stoicism. That's not correct. There are substantive differences that we've uh talked about. But there's a significant overlap and and perhaps especially with this sort of seriousness in which both people like Mousashi and the stoic writers we have approach life and you know taking this fundamental question about if you think about I think both maybe one way to get at this of of course they take living seriously but one way to get at this is um thinking about Mousonius Rufus he has that line that he tells Epictitus about mistakes of logic being like burning down the capital and it's sort of like trying to take excellence to every domain even you know issues of of logic that might seem trivial and I think that's an attitude that would be shared with between people like Mousashi and Monius Ruvus Hado Pier Hado talks about the stoics trying to reject especially Marcus Aurelius trying to reject things that are frivolous in the in the worst sense of this in that word not not in terms of no not having fun or something of of this sort, but uh you know not not wasting time and if you're applying yourself to something doing as well as you can. >> Yeah, makes sense. Yeah, I agree. >> Yeah. So, I think that's a fundamental similarity that's worth opening with. And and we see this uh a number of themes in the beginning of the book that connect to that point with Mousashi talking about the four ways of life. We've got the farmer, the merchant, the warrior, and the carpenter. And each of them have their own roles. Perhaps we have some connection to role ethics or more traditional hierarchical societies or these sorts of things were uh well defined. And of course, this idea that where wherever you find yourself, whatever way of life you have, you ought to be excellent at it. And I think you know my take away from this section is that Mousashi's connecting of course was a part of the groundbook connecting all four of these and noting how although he's focusing on the way of the warrior there's a life of strategy or an art to strategy that connects all four of these lives and they mirror each other and um have these similar principles that we can uh apply to each wherever you find yourself. Yeah. So, strategy is about winning or excellence. And there's these different there's these different types of people. Farmers, merchants, warriors, artisans, people that make things. Um, and you there can be a strategy specific to each of those. And I think that's the is that the the third book, Fire is the one for fighting. That's like the strategy specific to fighting. But the pursuit of excellence, what it means to be to be great, um has a lot in common, what good strategy looks like has a lot in common across all of these. Um it reminded me I thought less about the role ethics. It reminded me more of like Plato's view of you know certain kinds of people. Mhm. >> Um Plato talks about the, you know, the the maybe the artisan, the bronze sold people, people that make stuff, produce things. Um the silver sold people, the warrior class, and then and the politicians, and then the um the philosophers, the kind of gold sold in the Republic, this myth of the medals. It reminded me of that of kind of there there's these kind of types of people. Um but the the stoic world ethics would be you should identify what kind of person you are, what what you like to do or you should accept where you find yourself and you should pursue excellence in that area. Yeah, that was the parallel as I saw it. >> Yeah, I think yeah, that's a good good connection. Um, and just to make uh what we're saying concrete, I'll read out a section of um or just to give an example of what we're saying in terms of how Mousashi connects these ways of life. I'll read out a uh section here where he does just that. And this is from um the uh David K. Gra translation. This is what I'm reading from. So he's Mousashi says determination in action, efficiency, vigilant attention to details, comprehending form and function, understanding high, middle, and low levels of energy and how to create morale, apprehending the intangibles, everything of this kind. These are all things that are in the mindset of the head carpenter. The principles of military strategy are the same. So it's clear example of mental skills really or character attributes that apply to the life of the carpenter especially the head carpenter and uh anyone who finds the principles of military strategy relevant. >> Yeah, it's a great quote because the other I mean it has to go both ways because the other thing is why am I reading this book if I'm not a samurai? You know, I don't have a sword. um why am I reading this book? And it's because this is a person who's become excellent at those characteristics, you know, paying attention to the right detail. Uh understanding the energy or the morale of people and how to influence that, knowing, you know, knowing where to place your attention or your focus. In Stoic terms, you might say making good use of impressions, not falling into mistakes and reasoning. and the excellent samurai can do that, but so does the excellent carpenter, the excellent farmer, the excellent merchant. These are just the the building blocks of a good life. Um, and so I'm going to I'm going to learn from Mousashi, not so that I can kill people in duels, but because there's somebody who knows how to perform under pressure and has like achieved achieved excellence in their domain. And that's crosscutting. That's why it's the ground. It's the ground book. It's the foundation that cuts across. There's a there's a foundation of strategy that cuts across all kinds of lives. A foundation of of how to live that cuts across all kinds of lives. >> Yeah, absolutely. And uh one other part I like about this section is how Mousashi clearly admires some of these other ways of life, especially when they are uh live to their full potential. Just the way he describes carpentry is uh detailed I think in a way that nicely shows his respect for the craft. >> Yeah, I agree. It's it's not I mean I just I just made this analogy to the myth of the medals. There's like a hierarchy in the myth of the medals, right? Like the philosopher is better. You don't necessarily get that reading this book that the warrior is better. At least I don't remember getting that. They look at these sucks to be a farmer. I'm a really cool samurai. there there's a kind of respect to all of these domains as you said something to learn from each of them. Another thing that I I was thinking reading this interested interested in your thought on this is it's almost like this inversion of but there there's almost this inversion of like when we think about these crafts I think about the way we study philosophy now and there's this kind of view of like well you know you should be like the young man and you in Epictitus' school and you should learn about philosophy and you should inorp orate into your life and you should practice stoicism and the sooner you start doing that the better or you should practice whatever kind of philosophy you want to practice and the sooner you do that the better and people come to I I feel this way people come to philosophy later in life when they're retired or they have more leisure and they go wow I wish I got into this stuff or earlier this would have helped me so much I I almost feel in reading Mashi and coming looking at these roles of the carpenter the warrior the merchant the farmer he's almost inverting ing that paradigm where it's it's like you don't study and then live. It's like first you live and then you like reflect upon what all the things you learn through like developing your expertise at your craft. >> Mhm. >> Like I am a I am the best fighter. So therefore I know a lot about strategy. I know a lot about how to live. and let me like go into a cave and reflect on what I know I must already know if I've become so excellent at this domain as opposed to I'm gonna read everything there is to read about swordsmanship. I'm going to practice and then I'm going to become the best fighter as the thing I do at the end of my life. >> Um I thought there was kind of that inversion of that where >> he's not telling the farmer to like read his book and don't become a farmer until you've studied strategy. It's it's that the farmer understands strategy from doing from living. And I I find that kind of empowering of this idea of you don't need to. It's this balance where we have something to learn from the ancient stoics. We have something to learn from the great philosophers. But a lot of times we we've learned a lot uh we have good intuitions. We have good common sense understandings about the right ways to live and and how to make our lives better or worse. we just gain from existing and from doing and from being. It's not some secret locked away. It's like uh Kung Fu Panda, you know, there's not some secret in the scroll. >> Mhm. >> You know, the the the the the solution was inside if you already, you know, you lived and you experienced and you gained this knowledge from going out and becoming great in this other domain. Um I thought that was kind of like an inversion. It's it's not like an academic way. It's not like an overly intellectual way of approaching living well. It's kind of like a practicing doing way. Um, what do you think about that? >> Yeah, that's interesting. I think uh there's certainly the um the the centrality of practice for Mousashi. You know, he has a line you must train in the way in order to realize it in your life. And uh it's not intellectual. It involves repetition, discipline, you could you could almost say embodiment. And um that fits nicely with almost like the uh it's a almost like a life plan or you know don't want to say a life plan perhaps but where you're live the life of action for decades and then later see what you can crystallize from it and share with others. >> Mhm. which is certainly a different model from the academic one where you know you're training training training before executing as it were and uh perhaps also different from the a confusion model of life you know Confucious has that line which I'm certainly going to butcher which is you know at 30 you should should have read this at 40 you should have read this and then finally at 50 you are ready to be an excellent confusion essentially which is a quote I do like but Uh there there is that point about different different life paths I think is interesting. I think I've I've always been drawn to the uh something that's almost in between which is perhaps the approach from Cicero or Senica where they're clearly always doing philosophy in their life but there are times where they're forced either because of exile or life circumstances to seriously sit down and reflect or write these works of philosophy. You know, we read went through Cicero's on duties which he wrote while he was outside of the action and then Senna of Senica of course many of his letters are likely written when he was in exile which I think is slightly different than perhaps Mousashi model where you know he lived the life of the uh practitioner and then at the very end sat down and wrote out uh what he thought. >> Yeah. I've never thought of I've never thought of it that way. In in many ways, I don't know if that's an explicit stoic approach so much as it is just circumstantial around Senica and Cicero's lives, but it's almost like taking a year off, you know, doing a mini retirement, taking a gap year, and kind of like allowing your new identity to crystallize, reflecting on what you've learned up to this point, making some serious decisions about how that changes the impact of how you'll live. Um, that's that's a cool way to do it. That's that's got to be closer to the best way to do it cuz you get the best of both sides where you know you you're thinking deeply about these questions and then jumping back into the life of action because obviously the counterargument to live your life and then reflect on them when you're 60 is what if you are 60 and you kind of screwed up you [laughter] know like kind of >> you're like I wish I uh I wish I did things differently. It's like fine for Mashi cuz he's not the guy that died in his duels. um they maybe they would have a different opinion. So it's like maybe the reflecting back is like a it's a good solution for the lucky few or the survivorship bias or reading Mashi's book cuz he was really good at what he did. But for most people this kind of like iteration of live a bit reflect live a bit reflect is probably the ideal. I really like that way of doing it. I just I just the main takeaway which I don't think you're disagreeing with for me is this philosophy is about living. You are learning philosophy by living. You know if you go and you work a stressful job if you go and you're having relationships and you're going through personal troubles if you're making friends if you're producing art you're learning about philosophy which is I often I often forget that. And I often think, well, no, first I study the Stoics and then I go and live. I often kind of approach things like that. And if I if I'm screwing up my living, I need to go back and reread some philosophy. And and no, sometimes you you learn um from living, which, you know, maybe if that maybe if the fact that that's insightful to me means I maybe didn't reading too much philosophy. Um, but it's it's a good it's a good reminder that that um, you know, this is not a craft you just develop in the books and it's not a craft you just develop in your philosophical exercise either. It's it's a craft you develop by thinking about your your life up to that point and reflecting how you've lived and what's gone well and what's gone poorly. >> Yeah. A quick line uh related to this from uh Mousashi on training specifically to train so that it will be useful at any time and to teach so that it will be useful in all things. This is the way of strategy. >> Um >> I like that [clears throat] >> and and perhaps does that does also help clarify that we're not saying of course Mashi didn't train. It wasn't all performance. It wasn't all dueling. He, you know, he practiced on the practiced sparring, I'm sure. Uh, I don't know the details of uh what that looked like, but practiced the techniques he describes throughout his life. And there's a clear division between uh practice and performance. Well, and my understanding is they would use wooden swords, which would hurt and could still like mess you up, break a finger, scar you. But that that's a good that's a good contrast of practice and performance is the the consequence between a wooden sword smacking you, you know, hurting your shoulder, hurting a rib versus cleaving your body in two. Very clear divide there. >> Yes, there is. Let's see. Um, so something, you know, we're talking about training in the way we're talking about strategy, which is sort of which is the broader approach. I think you could almost align strategy with philosophy as two different ways of saying the same things. Um, and I think here's a good here's a good example of this sort of approach of mindset or strategy and how you can understand it as a way to approach anything serious. If you do not understand others, it is difficult to analyze yourself in all ways and in every instance. There are thoughts that deviate from the way as they are called. Even if you can say that you are striving hard every day on a particular way, if your heart strays from it, though you may think it is a good path, when viewed objectively, it is not the true way. If you do not perfect the true way and your mindset becomes slightly skewed, later it may become greatly arry. You should examine this. So up front we have almost the Socratic maxim, the delic maxim. If you wish to analyze yourself, you must analyze others. Uh and then we we have these notes on sticking on the path really following the way not becoming detours or perhaps even un understanding this not building bad habits might be a good modern way to put it because those you know initial small habits can bad habits can compound uh and you may be go greatly arry. >> Yeah. What does that mean? What is sticking on the What's an example of someone sticking on the way versus someone getting off the way? >> Yeah, that's a good good question. Let's see if uh so something that is called out explicitly by Mishashi in this book is focusing too much on tools or technique and uh sort of the point of the way I imagine there are different ways to put this and Zeno has this uh almost indecipherable or at least nonverbal character. But uh the point of the way is to win if you take combat. It's to win the duel and not be distracted by techniques, tools. So Mousashi, one of his maxims is that you should not have a favorite weapon. And if you do have a favorite weapon, that's a sign perhaps that you've deviated because you care more about wielding the specific weapon for whatever reason. That reason is not related to winning because different circumstances call for different weapons. Different people, I imagine, are suited to different weapons as well. So if we keep the samurai example, it's something like, you know, I I belong to this school, this samurai school, and they've we use this type of sword, and we use this kind of technique, and you're in a duel with somebody, and they've they're using a spear, and the spear is particularly good against your style of sword, but you're like, "No, this is this is our style, and I need to represent my style with honor." And then you you know, you you don't change up your sword approach. you don't take a spear as well. Um, and then you die or you get stabbed or you lose. And that's that kind of you've lost sight of the goal which is which is winning which is like an expression of of skill in combat and you've changed your goal to um you know representing your school well or something or demonstrating the excellence of this weapon in combat or uh you know just some goal that that is that is that is different from the original path. I mean that makes a lot of sense to me. Is that is that right? Is that what you is that how you're understanding it? Yeah, absolutely. I think that's that's how I'm understanding it. Here's a nice quote. There are times when it's better to wield two swords than one. When fighting singly against a crowd or when taking a hostage, it is advantageous. There's no need to write about things like this specifically at this point. Having one thing, you should know 10,000. Practice and achieve the way of strategy and there will never be a single thing you do not see. You should investigate this extensively. I like the ending of that as well. Well, it's sort of like, you know, I'm not going to do your homework for you. [sighs] >> And perhaps there's a truth there that uh if this was completely spelled out, it may not be internalized. >> Well, in the sense that Yeah. Go ahead. >> Well, I bring up the Marcus Aurelius quote all the time about how if someone could show me the Stoics are wrong, I'd change my mind. I'm after the truth. I'm not like supporting this school. Um it's the truth I'm after. who says he says it's the truth I'm after and the truth never hurt anybody. Um, and so that's why I'm thinking of the ways like we we we from a philosophical example, we get off the way when we saying, oh, you know, Chrysopus argued this or this Zeno argued this and I this is I've got to hold to this and you kind of lose track of, well, the goal is to live well and stoicism is one input into that or or different philosophical schools are different input into that and Sakica picks and chooses pieces of Epicuranism to cherrypick and we're not like, "Oh, can't you can't quote those guys because they're not stoics. It's nothing it's nothing like this. It's just look I'm just trying to live well. This is one kind of input to that. And that's the kind of analogy I'm taking here. And then the part where he's like there's a thousand little bits of combat particulars we could talk about, but we're not going to talk about that now because you need to get the foundation down, which is this idea of strategy. Win at all costs. Don't be overly attached to things. I see that paralleled in the view that people sometimes get frustrated with stoicism because they're like, "Well, it doesn't tell me exactly what to do." You know, you're telling me how the Stoics would deal with smartphones. Tell me how the Stoics would deal with this particular political situation going on now. And it's like, well, it's not this kind of input output. You can't just run a calculus and say Epictitus would say exactly this. You say, "Well, I think Epictitus would think about it this kind of way. I think Mark Surelius would think about it this kind of way. They'd avoid these kinds of mistakes and reasoning." And people say they they kind of see it as a bug, but Mashi might say this is a feature of Stoicism because by not being so prescriptive, it's allowing you to exercise your own judgment. It's allowing you to exercise your own knowledge. It's not just about reciting the right line or repeating the right passage. It's about making a judgment call in the situation as the as a com as a combatant, as a participant in life. Yeah. Does that does that resonate with you? >> Yeah, absolutely. I think that's uh that's on track. And um [clears throat] I think this way of thinking can [sighs] also sometimes be a little bit more be useful in the sense that sometimes even you know the questions we're asking are uh revealing that we're distracted or fundamentals aren't right. You know, you can imagine someone stressing out about what weapon they should use before a duel. And is that the right question or should they have been be thinking about something more broadly about, you know, how how they're going to win and then work from that starting point or is that if you know the sign the fact that they're stressing about the weapon mean they made some other mistake down the line and uh perhaps pulling that out into a different context. You know, sometimes people in in the business context always think about a process or what's the ideal process to use here. And often it's sometimes it's useful just to pause and see, you know, rock bottom. What are we trying to do and how do we do that? Ignoring all ideas people have about some process we're supposed to follow or best practices or or so on. >> Yeah, I really like that metaphor or like that analogy. No, it just all really resonates with me. I was having a conversation like a martial arts conversation recently about somebody they did a keto um and they were like really excited about oh people are showing the value of aikido. They're showing like the value that it can have in jiu-jitsu or in grappling. And I don't know, maybe this is easy for me to say because Brazilian jiu-jitsu um iikido for those that haven't practiced, it's a martial arts that that um it can sometimes in in like a mixed martial arts space be made fun of for not being effective. And this person was like proud that Aikido's effectiveness was being demonstrated. And it's not trying to judge this other person, but it's like I feel I I felt like they're falling into the exact trap we're talking about today, which is like your pride shouldn't be attached to Aikido any more than my pride should be attached to the history of Brazilian jiu-jitsu or something. It's just, you know, in that in that moment, in that battle, in that fight, what is the most effective technique to employ? And it would be a mistake if I was like, well, I'm not doing an Aikido technique because Aikido doesn't work and I'm blinding myself to that. That's a mistake. But it's also a mistake to be pro to be proud and to say, well, I'm going to I'm going to pick this one just because it uh this is the kind of team I'm on. It really resonates with me in a martial arts example again because this is kind of a warrior book. So, I see the parallels. I'm thinking if we flip over into life, maybe this is you gave a good example with business processes. I I think it's just I think it's just this tendency to like kind of pick teams, get caught up in the details, as you said, the the be emotionally invested into the how or the what instead of just the the the the why or where we're trying to get to. Yeah. I see that in politics all the time, right? Like I I think one of the things I'm always trying to do in political discussions is like well you know we're trying to help people or we're trying to we're trying to achieve what's the aim we're aiming for and then like what's the best way to achieve that aim not what's the what's the way that's been argued for by a certain political party or another political party and oh we can't use any of those tools because this political party argued for them um is is it's so silly right and And so I guess it's kind of not taking teams as part of it, not not being on a team and just trying to keep that kind of zoomed out. I say zoomed out, maybe it's zoomed in. I don't know the the amount of zoom, but it's it's it's a difficult balance to maintain. It's I think just Mashi articulates it really well here. >> Yeah, I think so. As a general principle, I think there's also related to this in terms of the martial arts discussions. So, you have a often someone will have their favorite art and make this exact move. You know, this such such an art is useful in self-defense situations. Therefore, that gives some amount of credence to this art or something of that sort. And you do wonder, you know, what I think the sort of the questions in the background are, you know, why are you doing this art to begin with? If self-defense is so important, would you have chosen this >> art or is this really just sort of a rationalization, >> right? In a way that, you know, whatever art you choose, if it's driven by self-defense purposes, you know, well, you know, defending yourself in what circumstance and so on, you know, why did you choose this specific art? Is that the is that is that the right move? Otherwise, maybe there's some some other aim that it serves that's uh could have could be an equally good one given your uh or not given your uh position and traits and so on. So, >> yeah, I often wonder about that argument. It seems like maybe there's a there's this stuff in the back these background assumptions that sometimes suggest that's not the right uh right argument to be having. Yeah, I mean I like that I like that idea of just I mean I guess to simplify it's just remembering your why [clears throat] and you know if the reason you fight as a samurai is to represent your school that's fine. I guess maybe the Mashi's point would be that that's not or then then that's coherent to stick to your style. Mousashi's point then is that that's not the real why because that's not like the fundamental goal of the discipline. The fundamental goal of fighting he's making kind of a claim about what fighting is. Fighting is about winning. Strategy is about winning. Um it's not about showing off. It's not about demonstrating something. It's about getting in in combat with somebody else and coming out on top. And so you're perverting that fundamental goal. Right? Right? So then you you start studying his style because that will help you achieve the goal of winning and then you forget the goal. And then in philosophy then the goal is living well. So you start reading people to start to live well. start having conversations with friends about philosophy and then you you drift away from the goal when you when you um become too dogmatic or you stick to you stick to um a certain school or certain uh group of arguments just because that's the school you belong to or the the the system if you're a utilitarian or an effective altruist or you know whatever kind of school you follow or system of thought you follow you just kind dogmatically follow it and you you become one step removed from that goal. So this foundation here is like if keep keep winning in mind that's that's the ground that's the earth that's why it's book one remember that fundamental why that first principle well this is helping I'm burn I know we set this up to say our thoughts on it but like this conversation is like improving my thoughts as we go so I'm like I'm understanding the book better as we talk about it which is great. [laughter] >> Excellent. Excellent. A a nice place to move from here is um uh the following quote from Mousashi. You should not discriminate against or develop special likings for certain weapons or anything else. Too much of any one thing is the same as not enough. I think that that first sentence we've covered, but the second one is also a nice statement I think of the idea of indifference, stoic indifference. Perhaps you could think about it as uh you know choosing the right amount of a given thing or even thinking about Aristotle and you know the mean of virtue but uh this you know this idea that you too much of any one thing is the same is not enough. I think that's a nice statement of uh one way to think about indifference and really a nice maxim to keep in mind. Well, what I like about as a maxim is just this idea of opportunity cost really explicit that you're you're always you're always giving up something else when you do something. So if you if you focus where is your attention going, where is your time going? Where is your focus going? Where what are you valuing? Because you can't value everything simultaneously the same. And so you you need to place the stoic idea. you place virtue and vice and character above these other things, they take precedence. They take higher value. And if you put if if you have too much of the indifference, this is the connection I'm making. If you have too much of the indifference, you have not enough focus on your character and that kind of development. [snorts] Is that is that how you're connecting it to indifference? >> Yeah, I think so. And if you think about indifference as not fundamentally valuable, but of course the stoics say some are preferable. Others are dispreferable. But what virtue consists in is choosing between indifference. Well, and there's no thing that is, you know, fundamentally always good, fundamentally always bad, except for, you know, virtue and vice. >> Yeah. Well put. There's also another nice line in the next paragraph. Without imitating other people, choose what is appropriate for your own size and shape. You should have weapons that you can wield comfortably. For generals or foot soldiers, to think or dislike certain things is bad. Being adaptable and inventive is vital. You know, one way to choose the right amount of something is to look at your own traits or your own um >> position. This also made me think of we don't normally talk about things this way, [clears throat] which is why it's good to read other people, but you think of indifference as flexibility, adaptability. Like I Are are you the kind of person that can choose death when it's the right thing to choose? Are you the kind of person who um yeah you have a certain habit or system or way of going about your life that you prefer but now something's happened some crisis has got come up some extreme situation has come up and now you have to change you have to give up you have to give up on sleep or you have to give up on your diet or your exercise routine are you adaptable to that just kind of clicked in my head it's like what what does good what does good use of indifference look like it means like not getting too attached attached to them. But that's almost like a negative thing, like don't do this. The positive picture is the person who's mastered indifference is incredibly adaptable, incredibly flexible. Okay. Um, all things being equal, I'll choose this, but if I'm in a different situation, I'll choose something different. If the situation demands something different of me, I will be different. Um, if that's the right way to live. Um, yeah. Yeah. And I think adaptability is kind of under underappreciated in those conversations because we think about it like a temperance, avoiding desire, but really what what does that mean? It just means that I can put my desire in multiple directions. I can want multiple different kinds of things as they fit my larger goal of living. Well, that just clicked for me right now. I think that I have some more to chew on that some more. It's a cool idea. >> Yeah, I think so. That's that's a great way to put it. I think uh I don't always put things that way either especially if you think about virtues like you know discipline or moderation temperance it does often seem like more of a there's a negative thing of course but even if you go the the next step it's about just choosing the right amount but what it's more than that right it's not just choosing the right amount in a specific moment in a snapshot of time it's it is an ability that it need needs to show up in a number of different situations. You know, that's it's needs to be sort of internalized in a way that you know that's not just a list of amounts and you know the situations you've faced in your past. >> Well, to make it concrete and to kind of sell myself out a little bit, I I think about some ideas like what do I think I can't live without? Like where are my kind of ideas of inflexibility? I'm like, man, I can't live without sleep. like I I love to sleep. I can't live without, you know, exercise. These are like important fundamental parts of my life that make me happy. Um, you know, I I have certain parts of my routine that I like to stick by. And um that makes you vulnerable, that makes you inflexible. And I'm not saying don't have routine, but I'm saying if something comes up and there's some sort of you I move across the country or some sort of serious change to my life, I have to take care of somebody that's sick, you know, can I can I still can I still be happy with with the change to all these things that I find pleasurable and I find nice and I enjoy in my day. And it's like, yeah, you can find pleasure in other kinds of things. You can select other kinds of things. Maybe they're not the things you prefer in a vacuum, but that's okay. Yeah, that's that's empowering. It's an empowering way to think about instead of like, you know, whipping yourself in the back and being like, I shouldn't desire, you know, I shouldn't desire sleep. I shouldn't desire, you know, video games or, you know, reading or these kind of hobbies that I enjoy. It's this kind of flexibility of like there's other things that I could enjoy. There's other things that I could do and choose in the moment or pursue if life required me to. >> Yeah. I'll have to think of this one some more, but I like it. Yeah, I think it's that fundamental stoic move. I suppose that in any situation you can be excellent and that's uh that's energizing that matters and I suppose the way that Uashi might put it is uh in any situation you can get back on the way or follow the life of strategy. It also makes me think of a there's a statement Senica makes about how the sage >> perhaps he doesn't say exactly exactly this but he says the sage could live well without friends >> and uh but I think Senica also believes the typical sage has many friends it's almost almost a kind of paradox but you know you're the kind of person who can uh be self-reliant in any situation but and but also you know be ausive be social when uh that's uh you know that's available. >> Mhm. Cool. There are some really interesting points about rhythm and the importance of timing. Let's touch Mousashi talks about those more in um some of the future books. We'll leave that as a little bit as a as a teaser cuz I think that's that is interesting to discuss and not something stoics talk about as much. I don't think that's an idea we see at least explicitly in stoicism. So, we should talk about that some more. I think it's a very uh important part of life timing rhythm. >> Yeah. What does that mean for Mashi? >> Oh, you're going to ruin my teaser and go down this uh rabbit hole. But I think You know that just just to give a quick uh a quick answer to that would be one line from him. Timing and strategy cannot be mastered without much practice. We had the um there was the earlier line about how uh the it's important to pay attention to the energy of your opponent. high, medium, low, which also has to do with timing. And uh so I I think it has this um that this first obvious application in combat. Of course, rhythm matters, speed, how you react to your opponent, how you set sort of the the tempo of a fight, you know, not not merely reacting to uh combat, but setting the tempo to a fight. But also, there are these general ideas of tempo, speed, rhythm in other parts of life. Just as conversation, you know, conversations have their own rhythm. How often should you interrupt someone? You know, what's this your pace of speech? What does you know what does that say about the social interaction and so on? >> Yeah, that makes sense. I mean, obviously really really makes sense in terms of the fighting maybe makes sense in terms of how we deal with our with with indifference. I mean it it makes me think of these ideas in stoicism about like fate and obviously there's like uh living in rhythm or living in accordance with nature and not trying to force things that shouldn't be happening or trying to force force opportunities that aren't there or force things to happen that aren't there. But another way we're talking about timing here, what I assume Mashi is talking about in terms of timing is actually creating opportunities. Actually making that influence and change at the right rhythm, exerting kind of your agency at the right time, which is a bit different. I don't know if the stoics talk about that too much. >> Yeah, the stoics certainly talk about harmonizing with nature, harmonizing with others. Uh but I think there there is that other aspect of you know setting the tempo of your interaction with others or your own life. You know this I suppose this idea of choosing the right thing at the right time and the right time isn't always set by others. You know it's not something just just set by a social convention or something. But we should certainly talk about that some more because I think it's it's an it's an interesting and powerful idea. One last point I did want to touch on and then uh see if you have any final thoughts is uh there's an important ethical dimension to Mousashi's thought. He thinks it's essential to uh the life of the ways explicitly you should make your thinking free of evil. So this book isn't that might be somewhat surprising given this is a book about combat but it's not just a the way of the way isn't just tactical instruction of course it's much much more than that it's about becoming a certain kind of person. It's about not being dishonest being able to pay attention to what matters. not do anything that's useless and those sorts of that those judgments require ideas about what matters you know they require value judgments they require ethical stances so I think uh that's an important thing point to make here is that there is a uh as we're talking about the ground there something that's fundamental is the an ethical view about you know the good life not mere and that's a that's a life that's not evil not bad at the highest level and specifically in includes a number of things about you know the virtue of honesty to Mousashi there's ideas of honor of course that are essential to him so it's not I think that's that's one other point I think it's important to make that's sort of setting the setting the stage for the rest of rest of the rest of the book >> yes that it's not just the book about fighting and about how fighting has things in common with carpentry and other skills. It's a book about living and living has an ethical dimension. There are bad ways to live and you want to avoid these. You want to be a good person. Um, and understanding strategy, understanding the kind of five aspects of swordsmanship sets you up to in a good position to do that. >> Yeah. Well said. Well said. I find uh books like this they're books in this tradition simple easy to read in a sense but in another way very difficult because these ideas are often uh Mousashi doesn't do your homework for you I think and there's this question about you know what is the way what does this look like in practice and I I think uh I this conversation was useful because we got I think I was able to think through some different examples and you offered some others especially you know this question about sort of a life path or life plan and how uh how often you should reflect these sorts of things and how I think that's a you know a question about you know if I want to be the a good philosopher how often am I philosophizing would be one way to put it and uh I think uh being able to apply this book well is involves you know internalizing I suppose this way strategy in a way where you can answer questions like that. Let's uh end with the nine rules. I think that's a good place to end. So towards the end of this book, Mousashi says, "To those people who want to learn my strategy, the there are rules for practicing the way. Make your thinking free of evil. Train diligently in the way. Become familiar with all the arts. Understand the ways of all the professions in all things. Discern profit from loss. Learn to evaluate everything. Realize and understand that which cannot be seen. Notice even the slightest thing. Don't do things that serve no purpose. >> I think that's a good spot to end. Great. >> Thanks, Phil. >> Thanks, Michael.
