---
title: "Musashi’s Book of Five Rings: The Water Book (Episode 224)"
slug: musashi-s-book-of-five-rings-the-water-book
episode_number: 224
youtube_id: GWFZOdTT2no
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GWFZOdTT2no
upload_date: 2026-04-07
duration: 45:03
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Caleb Monttoveros. >> I'm Michael Tromblé. And today we're going to be talking about the book of five rings. In particular, the second book uh second ring, I suppose, the water book. This is from Mousashi, the Japanese swordsman from the 17th century. And uh it's a work that uh has a number of commonalities with stoicism and is worth thinking through because it has it's a Zen inspired book that's uh been exceptionally influential in the martial arts community as well as perhaps people interested in philosophies of life generally. So this is the second installment of that series. We're going through the water book today. >> Yeah. Great. I really enjoyed the first one that we did on this and um we talked we'll talked a little bit more about Mousashi's background and the historical context of that episode. So if you missed that one do do go back and start there. But this is my first time going through this book Caleb and really enjoyed really really enjoyed it. Um you know this but for anybody listening I have a martial arts background and you know my family business is a martial arts gym. That's what my my dad does. And so I kind of grew up in the dojo, so to speak. And it it was interesting reading this book and seeing how much of that philosophy we we were talking about the scale, but I always thought growing up when I discovered stoicism, oh, there's a lot of stoicism in martial arts. And now that I I'm reading Mashi, I think, wow, there's actually just like a lot of warrior Zen in martial arts culture, which makes a lot of sense. There's a lot of the way Mousashi talks about how to live, the analogies he makes between the pursuit of of fighting art and and how to how to live. There's a lot of that in contemporary martial arts culture. And uh that obviously overlaps with ancient Greek philosophy with other schools, other ways of life. But I almost feel like I've in reading these book kind of connected with a set of axioms or kind of paradigms for viewing the world that have been taken for granted in martial arts and are kind of laid out explicitly here. And so that's been a cool experience and looking forward to doing book two. Excellent. Yeah. So book two, book of water, that's about the fundamentals like the previous chapter, but goes a little bit more into more details about basic techniques of swordsmanship, but also mindset and principles. So we'll just go through some of the items that lessons, aspects of Mashi's philosophy that stuck out to us. Sound good? Yeah. And then I took the way that I I I took it is if book one is about general strategy, this is about swordsmanship in particular, like uh the the craft of sword fighting um as a subsection of of general strategy or winning. >> Yeah, I think that's correct. That's that's certainly correct. you know the first book there's this idea that strategy is the same thing throughout different crafts but Mousashi does distinguish he argues for that that also distinguishes some of the different crafts or different kinds of lives from one another so whereas this is just just about swordsmanship and it begins with uh mindset so I think a striking principle from Mous Usashi is that your mindset should not differ from your everyday mind in life or in strategic moments without changing it even the slightest bit make your mind broad and straight. So there's really this call to globally apply this way of strategy to every endeavor whether it's swordsmanship, ordinary social interactions, you know, eating breakfast, you know, you keep your mind broad and straight. And uh that brings to mind the stoic precepts around managing impressions and always being awake, right, to the impressions you're receiving and uh responding to them skillfully, not going slack, as it were. Yeah. And the I mean that's the very first those are the very first lines in this book you just read. And then he carries on um and says you know without trying to rein your mind in too tightly or letting it go slack at all um have it in such a way that is does not lean in any particular direction and set it quietly vibrating and that I thought of and I think about like that stoic view about the stoics have this idea versus we should always be question trying to get closer to the truth but then there becomes this you you learn that very quickly in studying stoicism you get across that idea very quickly if you if you study stoicism genuinely but then there becomes this harder question of like well how do I do that how do I become the kind of person that can do that successfully even when they're frustrated or they're stressed or things like this and we get I I I just love that description from Mashi about you know you take your mind and you don't rein it tightly or let it go slack you don't let it lean in any particular direction you center it and you set it quietly vibrate So it's kind of it's it's moving. It's got this potential. It's got this kind of small motion, but it's not biased to extremely in one direction. So yeah, absolutely agree with your idea about that's the way you should's point about that's the way you should carry yourself in all things. And then we get a bit of a description of it that I really like the quiet vibration, not leaning in any direction. >> Yeah, absolutely. you neither agitated nor lazy or or passive or something of that sort. >> And I think the use of physical metaphor is is useful and and perhaps uh I think is something one sees throughout Zen or different eastern texts. I think seeing the mind in this way but perhaps one doesn't get as much in um the stoic stoic applications of thinking about the mind. >> What do you think about that? Well, the Stoics, they don't use the physical metaphor. But the mind is physical for the Stoics, right? Like a passion. A passion is an expansion. So when I feel angry, my soul kind of expands. Or when I want something, so in anger, I want revenge, for example, my soul kind of expands towards the target. And when I'm fearful, I'm anxious or I'm depressed, my soul constricts. like they literally think your your your soul is changing shape when you experience these things. So that idea of centering yourself and having a quiet vibr vibration that to me is that I'm I'm not pay connects well with the stoic metaphor. >> Um >> Oh yeah, you're right. I think that's a great point. Um, okay. >> There's another nice line on mindset right in the next section. At quiet times, your mind should not become quiet. And when for some reason you are hurried, your mind should not become even a little rushed. Your mindset should not be affected by your body, nor your body by your mind. And I think that just that's a useful I that just brings to mind this idea of not letting your mindset, your judgments being determined by the environment, your body, what have you, which is a a difficult of course, but um an essential goal I think both for Zen and uh the Stoics. Yeah, I mean this comes back to that idea of impressions that we were just talking about where if you're not the Stoics think, you know, what the animal does, what the child does is they receive impressions and then they um react to them instinctively. um they they're they don't have this ability to kind to inter intervene on their action, change the trajectory of their beliefs or their behaviors or reflect on how they're acting or what they feel. So, you think about that. If if you're stressed in the house, your dog is going to become stressed. Their dog is going to respond to that anxiety. They're going to feel that energy. um if you're um if you're rushing, you know, your child is going to pick up on that and it's going to it's going to impact them. And so this is this is that picture of you know, how do you become the kind of person who you don't respond to those impressions automatically? Um your mental state is separate from that external environment. As you said, I think it's I think it's a great point. something we lose track of when we think about putting ourselves in the best position to to act strategically as Mashi would say or you know act virtuously as the Stokes would say. It's harder to do that if our mind is rushed or it's harder to do that if our mind is quiet which you know you described as lazy. We don't think quiet is a bad thing nowadays but you know lazy or not quick to act either. Well, so that so at some point on mindset which is also connected to Mousashi talks about energy rhythm and um the I think the sort of idea that of course he's talking about swordsman ship he's talking about more than that where it's pretty clear how your energy and you know the rhythm of your cadence, your opponents and such matter. Um, but I think that the lesson sort of extends a little further than that as well. So, uh, another section here where that stood out to me is, um, understand thoroughly how a small body can be large in spirit and know completely how a large body can be small in spirit, whether large or small. set your mind straight. Having a mind that is not controlled by your body is essential. And that's an extension of the previous point, you know, understanding that the shape of a body shouldn't necessarily influence your mindset, of course. Um, but also this idea of being large in spirit or small in spirit. Perhaps there's an idea of of willpower behind that or you know someone has um maybe a a kind of force or whether it's charisma or even just physical energy that extends beyond their physical size and that being important to convey. >> I like that idea. Well, it reminds me of Epictitus's points about you you think, "Wow, I'm so great. I have a a nice car or I have a big house." And it's like you didn't tell me anything about you, you know? He just told me about your possessions. I have MPT's example as a horse, but it's like, you know, stop you're not you stop bragging about your horse. You know, tell me about you. And I see that idea of, you know, you're not great. You're not tough. You're not strong just because you have a big body. And and again, he's meaning this in the sword fighting. It's this very kind of masculine fighting context, but it's like you're you're not a great strong man just because you have a big body, and you're not weak just because you have a small body. There is the there's the the mind. Um that is that is the more important part but then also not allowing it to be controlled, right? Not having a weak not feeling weak just because you have a weak body and not assuming you're strong just because you have a strong body. Yeah. I think those are critical points. >> Yeah. I I yeah, they're critical, but there's also a potential tension because at at once he says, look, your mindset shouldn't be determined by your body. But of course, your posture matters. You know, sword fighting is a thing that's done by the body. So an important another important principle is is you should distinguish the idea that your body should determine the state of your mind. But I think if your mind is proper in the right state, your body in a way should reflect that. And thus posture, the way you carry yourself does have some essential importance. And he's he's really quite detailed about how you know you're you should hold yourself. You know, do not wrinkle your forehead, but set in a crease between the brows so that you do not blink or move your eyeballs. narrow your eyes a little and soften your gaze placidly. And it goes on. He offers other precepts. You know, straighten the senus at the back of the neck, putting a feeling of energy into the hairline there. I like that level of specificity. Uh and he also thinks you should carry your posture throughout your day in a way in a way that's appropriate of course but similar to the opening section where you should your mindset this mindset of strategy should be carried into everything. So should this sort of uh view that posture matters, the way you carry yourself should be I suppose reflect this project of being strategic for the Stoics being >> Yeah, I think that's a great point. So I've kind of tried to set this up as a dichotomy and what I what I took from what you were saying, Caleb, is like it's not a dichotomy. It's not like you have the body and you have the mind and they're totally separate, which is way the the way the stoics might take it. They might say, you know, you can you can chain my my leg, but you can't harm my mind as Epictitus might say. But Mashi's quote was having a mind that is not controlled by your body is essential. And so basically, he's trying to, as I understand that, he's he's critical of uh having your body influence the strength of your mind. But he he still thinks having a a strong body is important, but that can flow from a strong mind or you can at least strongly influence it from a strong mind. And so I can't if I try to put that I I wouldn't want to be the kind of person where, you know, I I have an opponent and they're way bigger than me and all of a sudden I get kind of cowardly or I, you know, I get an injur a physical injury and now all of a sudden I think, oh, there's no way I can win the fight anymore. and this is kind of my mind my my mind being influenced by my body and that's a mistake. But because sword fighting is a physical skill, yeah, you need your body to be in the right posture, the right positioning. Um, you just want to stop the influence from body to mind. That's what that makes makes me think of. Do you think that's more accurate? >> Well, no. I think I think that's that's right. I think I do think the Stoics agree with this as well, but um it might not be uh might not be as obvious because you could take that first point that you know the mind and the body in a way should be independent of one another and perhaps conclude that therefore your the posture of your body doesn't matter >> and I don't I don't I don't think the Stoics would believe that though >> and Cicero in fact has a uh quote from on ends I think it's the last the last chapter of on ends where he he states that you know a posture that communicates sobriety, steadiness, a sound mental disposition and a purposeful use of the body is considered to be in conformity with nature almost brings a moral dimension to your you know physical posture. Sounds like something Msonius Rufus would say as well and I think that's that would be consistent with the stoic line. Yeah, I agree with you. So, I'll throw out the dicho I'll throw out this division. I was being too strong. Posture matters. How you hold your body matters. Just don't let yourself get broken cowardly or feel weak, you know, because of something that happens with your body. You can kind of the the mind a strong mind is kind of like sufficient for a strong mind. It's kind of like a self-contained thing. Uh, and then you can use that to to have, you know, the the hold yourself the right way, stand the right way, hold your sword the right way to so to speak, which obviously matters. Um, the Stoics would agree with that as would the as would Bonius. >> Yeah. It's all it's almost as if um the uh the a strong body is evidence for having a strong mind even if it's not conclusive. And of course, yeah, there might be different circumstances where this is just a point of adaptability where of course different forms of posture are required and uh you know one doesn't always need to you know perhaps in in the swordsmanship it might be good in some cases it might be good to deceive one's opponent by taking on an apparently poor posture or say of that sort and uh yeah so there's another section where Mousashi says regarding your physical carriage and strategy. It is vital to make your normal everyday posture your strategic posture and make your strategic stance your usual stance. I think that's that sort of that idea of taking this project and applying it globally through your life which in some sense I don't know if that's good advice all the way through but >> yeah go ahead you shouldn't you shouldn't uh crease uh you know lower your shoulders make your back straight without letting your buttocks stick out all the time or narrow your eyes a little so that you don't blink or move your eyeballs all the time. You know, I I agree. Not not literally, but I mean, charitably, strategy for strategy for Mashi is is kind of like virtue for the Stoics. It's trying to do well, trying to live properly, trying to win. Um maybe it's a bit more outcome focused than the Stoics would Stoics would place it, but it's about uh doing your best for the best outcome. And so it's just not making I think there's this idea of not making this gap in the way you think or in the way you hold yourself between these you know moments of battle and the moments of everyday life because you know you should be thinking strategically in all moments. Your everyday posture should be strategic. Your everyday mindset should be strategic. Um, which comes back to what you were saying at the star cube of, you know, you should always, the stoic would say, you should always be, you know, carefully examining your impressions. Your your life just is your everyday the culmination of these everyday moments. Um, and so that's a that's that requires just as much attention and focus as these kind of big pivotal moments. It's interesting coming from Mashi as a sword fighter who you know thought to the death because you think well is it really as important you know should my you really don't think I should have a kind of different posture in these moments of the these battles as I do do every day but you know he's arguing against it he also has this at the end of your quote kill he has this line for those that haven't read it he goes you must investigate this thoroughly and that's the kind he he he he throws that at the end of when he thinks he drops a banger and he's like, "This is a good one." He just is like, "You must investigate this thoroughly." Which I like because it's like it's basically this idea of like what reading this sentence is not sufficient. You know, like I've pointed you in the direction you need to kind of practice this. Um your your everyday posture should be the same as your strategic posture, but you must investigate this thoroughly. Like there's still work to do, which I enjoy. >> Yeah. I think uh you have to do your own homework as it were. >> Yeah, you see that phrase again and again or the alternative phrase you'll see sometimes in the in two sections after that in my translation is this takes serious practice to understand your opponent's sword but not look at it at all. It can be said that this too is an extremely important thing in strategy. This takes serious practice. >> Yeah, I like that. It's just like this is not reading this book is not sufficient is something that I agree that's the way that I think about self-improvement. I think that there's it's theory and practice. Those those are two things that are required in unison and that gets called out explicitly here. >> Yep. Yep. Absolutely. There's another point he makes that uh is obvious but takes a lot takes practice requires I think consistently reorienting yourself which is you know be direct with your purpose and here the purpose of sword fighting is you know your sword is a thing for cutting down your opponent that's your goal. So when he talks about things like positions, he'll say things like do not think of taking a position. Think of cutting your opponent even after covering different positions. Likewise, you know, you're not thinking about belonging to a specific school, you know, specific school of martial arts or a specific school of swordsmanship or being married to specific techniques. So I think this is a point that applies throughout you know practice training remembering to keep in mind that goal uh which is when in a sword fight cutting down your opponent and also of course in performance when you're in uh battle keeping that in mind and not being not yeah not having you you know your mind go quiet and losing sight of that goal having like a kind of purposelessness or on the other side grabbing on to purposes that are not relevant to the situation at hand. So I think that's uh one of those things that's in a way obvious direct. You want to be focused on what actually matters but in so many different scenarios is easy to lose sight of. >> Yeah. I I I mean this really resonates with with me. I think of Bruce Lee. He had this fighting philosophy as this um cheek kundo was was his style, but it was this kind of rejection of styles. Um it was incorporating sparring and then whatever is effective from any sort of style towards this this goal of um I'm not a Jeep Kundo expert, but this goal of fighting effectively. Yeah, I I think about the early UFC's um Ultimate Fighting Championships where people came in and they had these styles and they had these preconceptions and you basically introduced them in in this open competitive environment around this idea of this single goal of winning and there was this iteration towards a better style or a new style and you saw the strengths and weaknesses of all these other styles. I bring this up just because it's it's a martial arts example with Mashi. It's about fighting and he's saying this hundreds of years ago about you you have this goal to cut the person down. It's not the style of it's not the two sword style. It's not your master's style. It's it's not the technique that focus you don't name the technique anything specific other than it is the person cutting technique and kind of centering everything around that. For me at least as a martial artist that's kind of framed as something that was invented the story I've heard before is that that's was invented by Bruce Lee or that kind of philosophy came about with Bruce Lee and maybe was iterated in in the author of Fighting Championships but you're seeing that coming through here which is I think it's I think it's right but it's it's well before its time and then that and the philosophy equivalent is you try to think about how to live well and that's the goal. It's not no sort of style. You never you never come um compromise that goal in the pursuit of any sort of style, >> right? Or different areas of life, you know, there's the apherism. It's better to be right than win an argument because those are two different things. You know, it's better to see the world as it is than come away as the victor in some rhetorical debate. I think it's maybe even Epicurus who has a line to something to the effect that you know the person whose mind was changed in a debate is a real victor since they've come away with uh knowledge whereas the other person likely believes what they believed it to begin with and uh I think that I think that's always useful you know maybe that specific apherism perhaps sometimes it is better to uh win an argument or you know being right is not always the most important thing in many conversations but having that whatever that tilos is of a given situation that's worth keeping in mind and not being distracted by uh you know whatever it is some desire to be seen proven as correct or uh giving into social conformity whatever it is just just yeah just remind you to keep in mind the tos of your different activities and not being not being distracted by no purposes that are irrelevant or perhaps you know sleeping sleepwalking through whatever it is and not even grasping onto any purpose at all. >> Yeah. The tilos that that's a way that ancient Greek philosophy gives us a language to talk about these kinds of things. Right? There's the purpose the tilos of sword fighting is is cutting down another person. Right? There's there's this purpose. There's this function. Keep it in mind. I looked up a quick Bruce Lee quote. Um and he says again let me remind you jet kundo is just the name used a boat to get one across and once across it is to be discarded and not to be carried on one's back and so you you study this martial arts style to help you achieve this tilos this goal but you don't carry it on your back you don't have it as this this burden that carries you down or restricts you from achieving that goal or tilos um that's that same idea Mousashi is trying get across here is is is remember the tilos of sword fighting or whatever you do. Um, that's not a word we use. That's not a word we use anymore. But that idea of purpose or function, it's something I do in my day-to-day life all the time. I think like why am I here? What am I doing this for? And that's is we don't name that when we talk about the typical stoic exercises. But that for me is a is a helpful exercise that I do. It's just like reentering on the tilos or the function of my task or or what I'm trying to achieve. And it helps me kind of not sweat the small stuff either. It makes things less stressful because often um that's maybe where the obstacles the way comes in because if you're if often if you're if you really understand the tilos of what you're doing, things that are frustrating you are not impeding that tilos, you know, if you really understand your goal is to learn how to sword fight, learn how to cut a man down better, often struggling with a specific technique someone has taught you. Uh, so now you you have to you have to change the style to fit your body type. That's not that's not harming the tilos. It's only harming your ability to copy somebody else or copy someone else's style. And so that's kind of maybe maybe we we subsume that exercise under that obstacle is the way idea. But I do think about tilos a lot. It is a part of ancient Greek philosophy that's really stuck with me. >> Yeah, that's well put. I do think it's uh if if that's something one could keep in mind throughout one's day that would be uh in every moment and that's something Marcus Rees calls himself to do uh is keep you know his purpose in mind at every moment you know that would be a good way to have a good day I think really did you have any thoughts on so there's a long a longer section in this book that's specific to sword fighting their uh forms Mashi talks about and he goes into detail about the sensations related to those forms, how you hold your sword, your opponent's stance and so on. Did you have any thoughts on uh that section? I don't remember have any strong thoughts on it because it's kind of just like he's like there's five five ways the five orientations or positions you know you can be raised middle lower to the right side or the left side those are the only five ways to stand and so no I mean I kind of to be honest I kind of was like okay this is this is just sword specific and I'm not practicing I'm not practicing sword stuff I want the life knowledge um but did did I miss anything? I'm not sure unless you're uh going to be challenged to duel anytime soon. But the uh yeah, I I agree that it's it's sword specific. It is um perhaps focus on general principles over techniques, which is something you would expect Mousashi to do. You know, he says, "These are the five ways you might, you know, stand or something with a sword or you can hold one a single sword or two swords instead of thinking about maybe more specific techniques. Although he does discuss different forms of cutting and so on, it's not perhaps as uh technique focused as other approaches might be." That's I that's something that that I thought when if I think about you know different approaches of teaching martial arts suddenly you have a technique and it's isolation or other people who might be a little bit more conceptual and say you know think about this position these are the sorts of things that matter there are different ways to get there and Mousashi seems a little closer to that second second form of instruction which I think is what you'd expect. Yeah, that makes sense. I think the conceptual but even in this book he blurs the line, right? He's he says, you know, he has the teaching of position, no position. So there's we can talk about things as positions, but we we also in a way there's not positions because you can take the pos the raised sword position where your sword's above your head and you can lower it a little bit so it becomes this kind of middle position. You can take it you can take the sword that's on the left side and pull it to the right so it becomes kind of a middle position or is kind of both of these things simultaneously. He says accordingly there's a principle that positions both exist and do not exist. And then above all when taking up swords no matter how you hold them it is with the intention of cutting down your opponent. So I mean maybe maybe a way to say this you know maybe somebody who's better at sword fighting could jump in here. Um but there's almost this view of different ways of looking at the same coin and you know you can talk about it from the top or the side but and in one sense you're you're you're talking about something meaningful. you're carving out an aspect of reality, but in another sense you're uh you know there is no real it isn't a binary and there isn't some sort of extreme distinction between you know coming from the left or coming from um the middle or or the top or the bottom. Um there's just this like kind of intention of cutting some someone down. So I mean that's vague. I don't know if that's the most succinct way of of sh of saying it, but I I read it as just that warning of there's different ways of looking at this thing, but that doesn't mean mean they are, you know, binary discreet, maybe not binary, but discreetly different things. There is a kind of fluidity uh between them that makes them blur together and you want to also keep that in mind as you get more advanced. Yeah, that's that's well put. And you could perhaps a better way to put it instead of making this distinction between concepts, techniques is that he applies that Buddhist parable, you know, everything's a boat that you try that you take on your way to the shore and then leave it. Uh, you know, everything's just instrumental in that way. Perhaps you use it for not to belong to a specific school for some social reason or because it gives you personal satisfaction, but you use it for the purpose of the task. And also, but also there's probably a deeper sort of metaphysical point that the blurry that the distinctions between these things are blurry themselves. You know, concept versus technique, posture, positions, and so on. And that's why that's at least one reason why it's essential to be, you know, focused on the purpose. >> Yeah. I mean, I I like that boat example. Going back to the boat example of like the left hand position is a way of thinking about fighting for the purpose of improving. It's almost like an intermediary pos way of understanding things. And then you drop it um if you don't need it anymore. and you don't say no I have to I'm in the left position so I have to do these three techniques and this is the right way you fight from the left position and in in one sense that might be helpful for an intermediate but there's a truth that there is no left position as well is is the the existence of a left position is both true and not true depending on the angle you're looking at it from um or your level of progress I think if we ground this in stoicism if I take a step back and think about this in terms of stoicism or the philosophy of life I mean I'm seeing so many great analogies to Brazilian jiu-jitsu or skills, other kind of physical skills I take up. I think he's he's making these great points. But if you think about it about lifting, um sorry, living, not lifting, my other my other great pursuit um living um you know, it's it's we don't want to hold too strong to any kind of concrete rules. No concrete rules. What would be what would be what would be a way that a stoic practitioner would put this into practice, I guess, is my question. Or put this idea in into practice is what I'm trying to is what I'm trying to think of. >> Well, there is the Aristo position around which is related to this which is sort of even rejecting recepts and we discussed that many episodes back. you know there's no universal I don't I don't know if so should necessarily agree with this but you know sort of having a question mark around a lot of principles there in a way they're underspecified so I won't make a strong claim that there are no universal stoke precepts but many apherisms from the famous stos themselves don't apply in every situation or they're specific to certain circumstances and that's just because reality can be so complex and detailed and uh you know if you think about Epictitus' role ethics that's a way of trying to make sense of the detail of the world and in a way perhaps other moral philosophies don't instead of saying you know there's some certain rules you can follow in every situation you know maximize expected utility or respect uh people's rights it's you know thinking of your role in that specific situation, maybe even roles, and then just letting that guide your behavior and that's going to be flexible between people, cultures, times. So, I think that's that's that's one way perhaps of getting at it. >> Yeah, I think that's a good way of I think that is a good way of getting at it. Precept was that idea I was trying to get to. Yeah. And so there there's this idea of, you know, you should act you should be kind to your neighbors or something. And you can think of that like you can think of that like a certain position you're taking or a certain technique you're using. And one way to approach the beginner is probably good applying the good techniques. U but the advanced swordsman isn't really applying techniques, right? They're they have a p they have a tilos in the moment that they're using their skill to perceive and to work towards. And um the the stoic is the doing the same thing. They're not the skilled liver, the skilled person is uh not looking for well what's the technique I can apply here? What's the stoic phrase I can apply here? um so much as they are just you know understanding the the kind just wise thing to do in the moment. Yeah. So that again it's it's it's the giving up the boat. The precept is the boat right it's giving up the boat that helps you get across the water. Nice. Yeah. One other concept I wanted to talk about is uh this idea I touched on earlier of rhythm and uh there's a few places where Mousashi talks about this especially towards the end of this chapter. He writes perceive your adversaries rhythms and understand where they fall apart and you will win. He also writes um pull up to this section again. A few pages later, that's not the right section. Sorry. Uh a few pages before that, he writes, "If the enemy's mind is on getting his body out of the way, you've already won." So there's a kind of mindfulness to awareness of the other person's mindset that comes through uh you know the rhythm of uh sword fight which is obvious or maybe obvious isn't the right word but sometimes people in martial arts talking about the importance of setting the rhythm in a fight. You know you don't want to always be on the defensive. Of course you want to see if you can try kick off an offensive cycle. not get stuck in defensive cycles. People do say things about this in combat and I think that that absolutely makes sense. But it also matters in conversation. You know, conversations have their own rhythms and uh there's a kind of attentiveness that I think if you took Mousashi's philosophy seriously, you'd bring to things like conversation and that would uh help you pick out, you know, the speed uh at which you interact with other people. you know, people who are are very socially talented, even, you know, the rate of speaking, how much they interrupt and so on. These sort of minute details probably uh do a lot to, you know, make people feel comfortable or uh at peace when when they're with that that person. So, I I think that's a that's a nice this this concept of rhythm. I think is a nice is a nice one to think about especially in interactions with with others but perhaps there are ways you can extend it to you know thinking about you know the rhythm of your life and uh how you can uh get out of a slump avoid parts of your life when you might be in too frantic of a state so I think that's uh that can be useful concept to explore investigate thoroughly I suppose exactly this must be practiced um I mean I like the idea I think philosophical types or at least me I'm I'm kind of analytical. I don't like this idea of using this discussion of like energy, you know, that that's never like resonated with me. But as soon as you pull it over into a physical metaphor, all of a sudden it resonates with me, right? And so there's this kind of idea of movement, of being frantic or being slow. And I like your point about being responsive to the movements of other people. Are they being frantic? Are they being slow? What are they responding to in terms of their movements, their mindset? That's what you were making me think of. And there's that there's a kind of intelligence that comes with picking up on that rhythm and movement in terms of a way to be good to other people and in a way of navigating situations skillfully. Agree with that. I think those were good points. The other thing this makes me think of is the quote you you said it was, you know, if your opponent's thinking about moving out of the way, you've already won. And there's a lesson there about the tilos again. But, you know, you're supposed to be thinking about cutting somebody down. They're thinking about cutting you down. And if you can make them think about not getting cut down, if you can make them think about defending themselves instead of cutting you down, you've disrupted their mind. you've taken their mind away from the tilos and now you have control of the situation as long as you can keep them their mind off the tilos. And I think that's that's an important lesson offensively. And then it's the the inverse of that is the defensive lesson which is you need to keep yourself thinking about the goal. Um you can't let people throw your mind off the goal. You can't let people disrupt your rhythm. And so we think of somebody getting frustrated, angry, bitter. It's like something in your external life has thrown you off your rhythm. You know that somebody that was rude, was unexpected event, a bill or an accident or a sickness. You know, has that gotten you off your rhythm? Has that gotten you off your your focus off the tilos? Right. >> Yeah, that's another great point. I think you can take this as an offensive or defensive lesson. Awesome. Anything else you want to pull out from this uh chapter? >> Um uh just to like and then just it's just funny quotes about sword fighting. I was just scrolling through now and reading stabbing in the face. This is what is meant by stabbing in the face. When you face your ad adversary in between his swords and blows, uh it's essential that you constantly remember to keep the feeling of stabbing him in the face with the tip of your sword. Um, yeah. So, if you have the mindset of stabbing your opponent in the face, he'll try to get both his face and body out of the way. Well, that gets back to what we're talking about. Um, but I it's uh I don't think anything else in particular to call out, but just we talked about this a lot in the first episode. Just an excellent example of how if living is a craft, expertise in one craft provides expertise in living. Not necessarily because in the words of Mousashi, it needs to be studied thoroughly and practiced thoroughly, but um you get insight into into how to win at anything by getting good at one thing. And so, you know, when you're when you're reading this philosophical text, it's funny to read about, you know, you've got to think constantly about going for the eyes. But there there is a lesson there about, you know, keeping keeping your opponent off rhythm, keeping them off uh what what the keeping them their mindset off the tilos or off their goal and putting them in a defensive posture and avoiding that yourself. That's a good rhythm for that's a good lesson on rhythm for anything. Awesome. Cool. Well, let's end with the last section of this uh chapter, which I think is appropriate. Forge yourself with 1,000 days of training and polish yourself with 10,000 days of practice. This is something you need to investigate thoroughly.
