---
title: "Question Every Impression | Ancient Skepticism (Episode 211)"
slug: question-every-impression-ancient-skepticism
episode_number: 211
youtube_id: FZzqp0iz30o
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZzqp0iz30o
upload_date: 2025-11-25
duration: 54:30
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Michael Tromblé >> and I am Caleb [music] Antiveros. >> And today, Caleb, we're talking about the skeptics on how to suspend judgment or more accurately the skeptics on why you should suspend judgment. some arguments from ancient Greek pyonists uh by way of sexist empiricist by uh by way of a a more modern skeptic um while still relatively ancient um but a a a other philosopher on why we should why we should not trust our sense impressions and why we should adopt a skeptical perspective as a default. And I wanted to talk about this today mostly because I think pyronism is really cool. I think ancient skepticism is is a really interesting philosophy of life that we sometimes don't talk about in favor of talking about Epicuranism or Aristotle or Plato. Lots of lots of bits of wisdom to gain from ancient skepticism. But also because we really in stoicism we talk a lot about this idea of pro or suspension of judgment or interrogation of impressions. We talk about it as this key stoic exercise. So I wanted to return to the roots to the experts of suspending judgment. The people who say that this is the most important ethical thing you can do which is the skeptics and then their strategies for doing it effectively. And what I what I saw by going back and reading some of sexist empiricus' arguments is that the skeptics they they employ some strategies for suspend suspending judgment, but they also employ a lot of arguments for why you should suspend judgments. A lot of arguments for why you shouldn't trust your sense impressions. And that's kind of part of their practice. I see the view as if you really believe you should adopt a skeptical position. If you really believe it's very important to interrogate every impression you have, then that process will be a lot easier, be a lot natural, a lot more natural, something it's it's less tempting to just let things pass by um uninterrogated or or non-reflectively. So if you can really sell yourself on the idea that we should be skeptical, we should be skeptical as a default. Then it's easier to train ourselves to to do it, then it's just the question of the how. The why is kind of answered. So today we're going to go over some skeptical arguments for the why. Why you should suspend judgment. Any other anything you wanted to add before I go further? >> Well, I suppose there are two angles to this. One is these debates in uh epistemology between the skeptics and the stoics. They were rival philosophical schools, you know, distinct ways of life. So you have these sort of debates where the skepticism, the skeptics of course argue that stoics should be more skeptical. Uh but we also have a sort of this other angle just on practice because they they both agree that one should have a critical stance towards impressions generally. And if you think about, you know, a continuum with a typical person, you know, in the middle, someone who's exceptionally gullible all the way to the right. Skeptics, maybe they're all the way to the left. But the Stoics are pretty close to the skeptics, right? They think we should be exceptionally critical of our, you know, general appearances and that in fact most people live in ignorance, under illusion, and so forth. So they can I think there's a sort of this practical point of utilizing what skeptical arguments even if uh the stoic doesn't go all the way. >> I really like that if the skeptic is a 10, the stoic is maybe an eight or nine. pretty skeptic. And then the reasoning behind this, well, the reasoning behind me doing this episode was, well, if you're a five or a six, you can learn just as much from the people that are a 10 to get you to that eight to get you to that stoic level. You don't need to go all the way. You can still be a stoic, but you can learn from the real experts to help you be more critical. And so in in terms of what we're talking about today, some of the philosophical context before we we get into the arguments themselves. So we're looking at pyronism. Um that's the it's that's the school we're talking about. It's a skeptical philosophical school founded by Pyro in the early 300s BC. And this makes Pyronism a contemporary of stoicism. But most of what we know about the philosophy comes from Sexus Empiricus which I mentioned who lived in the second and 3rd century AD. So after Epictitus and Marcus Aurelius. So we have this ancient you can think of it like Marcus Aurelius writing about stoicism even though Zeno invented stoicism around 300 BC. It's the same kind of relationship, right? You've got the founder of this skeptical school around 300 BC. Mhm. >> Then you've got this gap of around 500 years and then you have a later thinker sexist empiricist writing about it and the sexist wrote a book called outlines of pirateism and it's his arguments in that book we'll be talking about today and all so all the excerpts we're talking about are coming from that book. The the quotes themselves they're from Long and Sedley's collection the Henistic Philosophers. I've I've mentioned this before. I think that's an excellent book. If you're looking to go deeper in Stoicism, I think you should pick up a copy of the Hellenistic Philosophers. You just need volume one. That's got the English translation. Volume two is all the original Latin and Greek. I don't think that's necessary unless you're uh a trained classicist or or plan to become one. But that but that's where I'm pulling the passages from. And um yeah, as I said before, we're going to look at why you should be more skeptical to help you become a more discerning person and less gullible person as you put it. I think that is a good way of putting it putting it. >> Um if you think of it like an arisatilian way, maybe gullible is is one end. You know, overly skeptical is the other. It's it's appropriately discerning we're looking for. Anything um else before we jump into it? >> No, I think that's well put. Let's get to some of these uh arguments or strategies or skeptical modes. >> Yeah, they call them the translation I was reading, they call them modes of suspending judgment or um skeptical modes, but there's nine arguments here. So, we're going to go through quite a bit of them. And I really like the way that sexist lays them out because they they start broad and they go more and more specific. So the first reason we should be skeptical or a bit of context before this the the skeptics make this distinction between the actual thing you're observing or interacting with and your perception of the thing. The Stoics have the same way of thinking about it. They think about our minds as like wax that is being imprinted upon. That's the impression. It's like, you know, you stick your hand into some memory foam and it leaves an impression. And so your mind only has access to that impression, that imprint. And so the question is, you know, if I stick my hand in memory foam, how accurate is that impression? Well, it's pretty accurate. I didn't develop an extra finger. Still kind of looks like a hand. We know something about the world by looking at that impression. That's accurate. That's that's a hand. It's got five fingers. So on and so forth. It's a it's a relative size. It's an adult's hand versus a child's hands. We can we can know certain things about the world by looking at our impressions. The the reason the the skeptics go a step further is the skeptical position is that we can't actually know anything about the world based on our impressions. We really only have access to our impressions. We don't have access or we can't we can't be confident that those impressions accurately reflect the external world. And that's the that's the gap between the stoics and the skeptics. The Stoics, the Stoics say, "Yeah, you can. You just have to like really interrogate the impression. You have to be careful. You have to slow down. You have to ask the right questions. You can get it wrong, but if you, if you think about it carefully, you can get it right." And then the the skeptics just go a step further and go, "No, no, you can never you can never do that." So, these are arguments. A lot of these arguments are along those lines. They're arguments for why you you can't say you know something other than what's in your own mind. >> Yeah. There's this difference between appearance and reality and the skeptics argue you can't leap across that chasm. All you have are appearances for all you know whereas of as you say the stoics sometimes think you know you do come in you do come into contact with reality and can justify you know your beliefs [snorts] but both of them agree you're starting with appearances that's impressions. Yeah, you come in, the Stoics would say, you come into contact with impressions that both accurately reflect the world and you can be confident they accurately reflect the world. Where the skeptics would say, you can't be confident they reflect the world. So maybe they're true, maybe they're not. How could I tell you if I'm not confident they're they're accurate? So the first argument for why we should be skeptical about about the truth of our appearances, the truth of the impressions we receive is that we recognize that we all recognize that different animals see the same thing differently. So this is the argument that we can't trust our impressions as being true because we know that different living things perceive things differently. So a mosquito sees something different than a dog. We can't be sure how something really is on its own only how it's perceived by us because we know that an entire a different species is perceiving the same object entirely differently. So some quotes here sexist says perfume seems delightful to men but unbearable to beles and bees. Pigs get more pleasure from wallowing in foul smelling sewage than in clean pure water. That's some examples of how animals respond to the same thing differently. And then another quote here which I think was was really well put. Sexist writes, "If the same things appear unalike depending on differences between animals, we will be able to know how the object is perceived by us. But we will suspend judgment as to how it is in its own nature. For we ourselves will not be able to adjudicate between our own impressions and those of other animals. We are ourselves parties to the disagreement and hence in need of an adjudicator rather than capable of judging for ourselves. And I just really like this argument because we so often start skeptically about well I see it one way you see it another way. And I just love this kind of expansion of the problem. It's like your dog sees it entirely different way. Your dog wants to go and eat the poop you know that they that they discover. They want to go and smell um you know smell other dogs butts. And it's just like they're they're seeing an entirely different world than you are. So it's like not only is there disagreement between humans, there's disagreement between all living things about the real quality or nature of the object we're experiencing. That's argument number one. >> Yeah, this one's definitely more radical. It's uh and perhaps one where uh the Stoic it makes a little less it's more of a challenge to the Stoics really because it's sort of questioning the accuracy of human perception. For the Stoics, that's driven by reason. And uh skeptics are putting their question mark next to that. And I think I think the Stoics would say, you know, we're just different from other animals because we're rational. You know, it's one thing to say, you know, our tastes about a meal might be different. You know, if you were a dog, maybe you wouldn't like this food as much or perhaps you would like it more. Uh, but you know, as if you're arguing with about, you know, tariffs, you know, whether tariffs are a good policy with your roommate. Uh, how useful is it to think, you know, you could say, you know, if you were a Republican, you think this, if you were a Democrat, you think this, but how useful is it to say, you know, if you were a dog, you'd think this? You know, dogs just aren't rational. They're not thinking about appearances in the same way. So, I suppose the Stoics would uh would would make that critical distinction. [snorts] >> Yeah. If you were a dog, you'd say ruff ruff right now. Um, yeah. I mean, this is going to be constantly the stoic argument. I'm so displeased by the stoic argument at at these kind of moments that it's going to be, well, God made us and God gave us the ability to do this, right? Uh, and so we need to be careful, but it's possible to do correctly. That is like that is a big part of the stoic argument. Um, and so it's going to be, you know, God gave dogs the ability to perceive what is beneficial to dogs and God gave humans the ability to perceive what's beneficial to humans. Something like this, I I would estimate. You raised the right point though that this is just about sense impressions. We don't actually get down to kind of value impressions until later. And maybe it would be a more effective hypothetical though if you had an alien who came down from space and was rational but saw the nature of morality entirely differently. Maybe you kind of would have that same kind of position. >> Yeah. Yeah. And I do think you get close to that with some of their other arguments. >> Yeah. I mean, they'll make well spoiler, but they'll make that claim about entirely different cultures or countries viewing things entirely differently. >> And I do think there is something to the idea. It's harder perhaps to come up with examples in the intellectual domain but that you know some animals have heightened sense perceptions and uh perhaps you know initial sense perceptions that we we have are not as accurate for that reason they're very limited and uh that you know that requires some amount of obvious humility and prudence say one's to be more specific I suppose saying one's like ability to track game or something like that you know obviously some animals have advantages in that sphere and perhaps we should be open to thinking they have advantages in other spheres as well. >> Yeah, I guess the point about like maybe this would be the stoic position. I think this is the point you were making is that like yeah, maybe they have access to some truths that we don't have access to. like I'm gonna trust my dog about if it's on a trail. Like if if if the the criminal went that way, you know, I'm gonna trust the dog even though I have no way of discerning that. And it's not like, oh, there's some sort of disagreement about where if a criminal even exists, what a criminal is. It's just like that dog has access to very intense impressions that we don't have access to and is still discerning and making correct judgments about them. Yeah, exactly. And perhaps that's, you know, there's a sen the sort of skeptical worry that comes in. It's like, well, you know, how much how big is that reality that dog has access to, you know, or how little is, you know, the amount of information we have about the physical world? And shouldn't that be a reason for our skepticism perhaps? >> Yep. Great. Ready for argument two? >> Let's do it. So argument two, the first couple ones I like it because that they kind of flow like even if you dis even if you reject the other one the next one comes. So it's like the next argument is is that humans disagree amongst themselves about sense impressions. So it's like even if hypothetically we trust the kinds of impressions human receive to be accurate. We say some humans are capable of receiving some some accurate impressions. How would we judge between humans that disagree? because humans feel differently about things. Um, sexist writes, "People with jaundice say that those things that things are yellow, which appear to us white. People with bloodshot eyes call them blood red." This disagreement, it it means that we can't really know the thing itself, only how it affects certain people. And Sexus says people uh perhaps we are capable of saying how each object appears with respect to each human difference, but not of asserting what its power is with respect to its own nature. And one more quote, "Certain self-satisfied people, the doctrinire thinkers, say that in judging things, they should rate themselves above other men." We know the absurdity of this evaluation. They are, after all, themselves party to the disagreement. And if their way of judging between appearances is to give themselves precedence, they are by entrusting the judgment to themselves, begging the question. And it raises the same kind of point before which is that you need a judge. You need a criterion of truth as the Stoics would say. You need something that stands outside the people arguing. And if you're if you're different people arguing about the way something is, then you can't basically it's that it's that it's that point that you can't be the judge of that. That judge needs to come from somewhere else. But if we're just a bunch of people debating, how can we get that adjudication? How can we get that verification that the person with uh jaundice is wrong and I'm right just because what there's more of us or something or just that's the way that I saw things before I got sick and so on. >> Yeah, this one's fantastic. I was looking around for connections to the Stoics when they say similar things. And actually in the uh in discourses to 11, Epictita says this is a starting point of philosophy. You know the fact that people disagree with one another so much. It means that we need to have you know rules principles of thought to adjudicate these disagreements and determine what's true. So I think in a in a real sense this is a this is really a useful reminder for the stoics and you I think force is a kind of clarity of thought for thinking about you know what are the disagreements at hand and how do you actually adjudicate between them so that you can come to a a better uh uh more accurate picture of the world or perhaps you know and when when it's appropriate remain agnostic you know suspend judgment because you can't in fact you know adjudicate the the disagreement or determine who is right with appropriate confidence. >> Yeah, I like that point because when when you do stoics against the skeptics, we we're constantly presenting these arguments. Well, this is how the skep the stoic's going to get us the truth. This is how the stoic's going to get us past the skeptic hurdle. But there's this reminder that well actually I don't actually know a lot about a lot of things maybe and you know maybe I'm the kind of person that's going to have confidence there's a table in front of me or you exist Caleb but I'm not going to have those kind of cartisian doubts but there's probably a lot of things I shouldn't believe just because I grew up in a society that taught those values or it was kind of normalized or um it's just the kind of cultural norm and [clears throat] so the stoic is going to say no you need an adjudicator you need a source of truth You can't just take things for granted. We just we happen to think we have those or we we think those need to be thought about carefully. But it's a it's a nice reminder to be skeptical as well if you don't have them yet. Which I think is the point Epictitus is making is that every Stoic kind of has to start as a skeptic and then build that knowledge back up. You have to start with, oh crap, we all disagree. Uh I don't actually know how to make sense of that. I I thought, you know, um I I thought my way of doing things was the right way of doing it and now I've met this person from a different country and they think that's bizarre and gross and weird and I don't actually know how to make sense of that disagreement and then I so I need I need to create these kind of the this uh value system with justifications. >> Yeah. And I suppose that's where that's where philosophy begins is thinking about you know what are these different ways of life? >> Yeah. >> And what are the arguments for them? Yeah. So, I think that's a that's a really good one. >> Great. Next one is that okay, even if you're right, even if you you know, you got it all figured out, smart guy, even if even among the same person, the senses disagree with each other. So, Sexus says that the senses are at variance with each other is pretty evident. Honey seems pleasant to the tongue but unpleasant to the eyes. So, that whether it's absolutely pleasant or unpleasant is impossible to say. Hence what each of these things is like as regards to its nature we will be unable to say. What we can say is how it appears on each occasion. And so the the point here is that when you perceive honey you don't perceive a single thing. We know this because it makes us feel different things at the same time. It's sweet to the taste but ugly to look at. I don't think honey's that ugly to look at but I'll stick with your example of sexis. So our senses are disagreeing with each other. Um I I take this argument I take the argument here to be that you know you're having multiple experiences and another quote from sexist. Each of the sense objects which appear to us seem to make a complex impression on us. For example, the apple strikes as smooth, pleasant smelling, sweet and yellow. Consequently, it is not evident whether it has these and only these qualities or whether it has a single quality but appears different according to different structures of the sense organs or whether it has more qualities than those apparent but some of them do not strike us. So the argument here is that we we have no way of telling if an object has one nature for each sense or one nature that is interpret like only one single nature that's interpreted differently by each sense organ or more natures that our senses can't even notice or pick up. And so you know what really can we say about what an apple is? We're kind of stuck just saying it's just a bunch of different it is just it's what I smell and what I see and what I touch. But you know, what does that tell me about the apple itself? Basically, >> I was looking at I was sort of c this brought up the question. I was curious uh I suppose it's a little bit of a a theoretical matter, but do the stoics think that the or skep it sounds like the skeptics believe that different senses are responsible for distinct impressions in a way. So you know you have the impression that comes from your auditory faculty impression that comes from that sense of sight and so on. I was wondering if the stoics thought the same thing or you could imagine you know your impression is more like a combination of all of your your senses as it were. Um and there's a there's a nice line I think this is also from the the Henistic uh the collection of uh from Gil um where someone says about Chrysopus the soul as a whole dispatches the senses like branches from the trunklike commanding faculty to be reporters of what they sense while itself is like a monarch passing judgment on the reports. So perhaps that's not a precise answer to the question, but I do like that p just that general picture of you know the commanding faculty sitting at the top as a monarch passing its judgment on the you know reports of the different senses and you know the skeptical challenges and which of these reporters perhaps are you going to believe you know do you have sufficient evidence to put together a whole an accurate picture? >> Oh I really like that. Where was that quote from again? It's from G. Calcidius >> and this is from uh the Henistic Philosophies. >> Go ahead. I'm not sure if it answers your question about you know do those reports come as an executive summary [laughter] all all bought together or do they come as separate reports but that's I mean we might be getting a bit in the in the philosophy of mind weeds there doesn't I think that's an interesting question not one I know the answer to in stoicism about you know are you are you receiving these these things differently or simultaneously >> I mean simultaneously is a time aspect that's not really right it's like are they separate or are they kind combined and then run through the the mind. Um, interesting question. >> Yeah, it's the next line says the objects of sensation as bodies are composite and the individual senses sense one definite thing which does sort of suggest a specific impression per uh sense or faculty. >> Yeah. And then the question is what do we do when those disagree with each other or I mean this is a really really kind of this is taking it pretty far in the skeptical argument which is a what do we do if they disagree with each other but sometimes that's confusing because you're like a smell does a smell disagree with the site maybe they seem to be kind of a type difference but then there's this other point at the end about well you know we we when we think about when we think about an apple we realize we only see it through our senses. There's all these senses we're we're not experiencing. But I if I had to counter that argument or all these potential senses we're not experiencing. We know that animals have certain senses we don't see or see colors we don't see, for example. And that doesn't mean things don't have those colors. We just aren't seeing them. My counter-argument to this would be something along the lines though of, you know, that that that's potentially other ways of perceiving an apple through like hypothetical senses we don't have. doesn't mean the current sense is inaccurate, I guess, right? It just means there's >> potentially different ways of perceiving it. We don't know everything there is to know about it, but I don't need to I don't need to say I know need I don't need to say I know everything there is to know about the table in front of me to understand that there's a table that if I put my hand down on it, my hand stops and have that kind of confidence. >> Yeah, I think that's a good response. I I think this argument alone isn't very powerful but perhaps you can take it as sort of a general project for creating a skeptical attitude which says you know something like look you're just one kind of animal out of millions that that just has one perspective you disagree with your own kind even your own mind is not uh you know unitary and there sort of I think you know if you then if you add these other considerations other modes that we're going to get to then you can come up perhaps you know with a compelling where even if you don't go all the way, as you say, you can start to get into that more skeptical attitude. >> Well, here's another one. Here's an even on top of that. So then then sexist goes, okay, okay, okay. Even fine. Yeah, you're not if you're not persuaded by that, even your nose disagrees with your nose sometimes or even your eyes disagree with your eyes because um you know, you taste differently if you're sick, you see differently if you're tired. So things appear differently to us along four dep dimensions. They're dependent upon four things. He says dependent on our age. The same air is cold to the old and mild to the youth. Depending on motion because things distort if we're if we're moving quickly. Depending on intoxication because we perceive differently when drunk. And depending on predisposition uh what we've experienced beforehand because wine tastes differently to those who have just had a date or a fig. Uh I don't think that's an exhaustive list but examples of of things appearing differently to us under those circumstances. And then sexist says given that there is such a great disparity depending on dispositions and that men are differently disposed on different occasions. While it is perhaps easy to say how each object appears to each person, it is by no means easy to say what the object is like. I find this one actually quite compelling especially if you think about uh predisposition maybe as a mood or as an attitude or as a memory or an association you know it's like is that a nice city or do you just have like good memories in that with that city you know is that is that a good person that you just met or were you just in a good mood that day and we make these kind of value judgments all the time but I probably would feel differently about that stranger if I was in a bad mood I'd feel differently about that stranger if I was hungry. And yet I make a kind of value judgment about them. So I I I I like quite a bit the um that that's moving away from the sense experience, but I like quite a bit that argument about um even our experiences along the same dimension change depending on how we're disposed. >> Yeah. And I think you can see it even in some stoic exercises like you think about Senica's evening review where it matters that it's done in the evening, right? you know, he set aside some time and quiet to reflect on his day in order, which is different from thinking about, you know, what just happened amongst the bustle of the Roman court midday or something of this sort. And I think you can question which one of those places are more accurate or perhaps which one of them give insight that the other doesn't have. And I I do think that's uh that's a it's certainly true that you know experience changes depending on you know how we're disposed our circumstances and such. So I think that's got to be a relevant relevant factor. >> Yeah, I love this. Um I mean this is getting me pumped up. I think the comparisons of stoicism are really helpful. Maybe the stoic the skeptic would say these are insurmountable issues and the stoic would say these are challenges. And because they're a challenge, they have to be handled carefully. It is challenging to know the truth of things because our perception can be distorted based on our predisposition or our disposition. That's a challenge. And so the way I was thinking your view of Senica was he's kind of taking a moment, a calm moment, a habitual moment, a quiet moment to say, "Okay, I've got very few dispositions. I'm not moving. I'm not drunk. I'm not like angry or like on a high right now. And now looking with as few dispositions as possible. Where did I go wrong? Where did I judge things incorrectly? And so it's this the Stoic is rising to meet the challenge, accepting it as it is. But but thinks it is surmountable. Thinks you can be like, "Yeah, even me relax, I still think that guy was a jerk [laughter] and I'm gonna I'm going to commit to that view. I still think that was a delicious meal even now that I'm not hungry anymore. And like you can make those claims. >> Yeah. Yeah. I think it's Heroditus who says about the Persian philosophers that they would consider a matter sober during the day and then consider it well intoxicated in the evening in order to come to their final judgment. [snorts] >> Yeah, I like that view. I mean this is making me think about like what is the ideal disposition >> like is is is is sitting alone in your house the ideal disposition or I don't know is it better to be around friends or other philosophers? Is it is it better to be walking and moving around? Right? Like it's making me think about if these are ways that influence how we perceive, what is the most accurate kind of what is the most accurate disposition to be in? >> Yeah. Yeah. sort of hearkens to some of Nichzche's work where he talks about how the importance of diet and how that's totally underrated by uh philosophers and how more philosophers talk about what they eat and their you know their physical health. >> Mhm. >> Before we uh come to uh proper judgments. >> Great. Anything else on this one? >> No, that's uh I think that covers it. >> Cool. Um the last one I I did this one kind of quickly because I just don't think it's as compelling. But um I think the last of this like um it's these kind of arguments. The first five are these like successive arguments where even if you dis even if you argue against the the first one the next one comes and the last one is just even among the same disposition we perceive things differently depending on our relative location. That's it. And so [snorts] the quote here is for example the same colonade seems from one end uh seen from one end appears tapering and seen from the center appears completely symmetrical. I don't know. I just find this one like less less helpful. I guess we have a relative position all the time. But his point was like even if all those things were the same, you know, if you look at something from this angle looks different than from this angle. So what's the right angle to look at it uh from? I don't know if that one's as philosophically interesting. I don't know what you think. Well, it potentially connects to the view from above where if you're >> looking down at your life from different vantage points or I know that he's not really talking about time, but you can also imagine, you know, take evaluating different slices of your life from different temporal vantage points or considering different spans of time. And that does seem to that I think that does influence how people think about uh things of course you know putting uh I think if you make a view it changes what's salient or what stands out what's important I think if if you zoom out or zoom in so you know you know the point about different angles maybe is not uh not the most important but there is something to just this general point about different, you know, perspectives. >> Yeah. I mean, I guess if I try to be as charitable as possible, we get a lot of stress about whether or not you're tall or not, for example. But tall is kind of like a relative thing. If you're short, somebody seems tall. If you're tall, if you're very tall, that person seems short. So, I mean, it's it's easy for me to joke about the colonade, but people like live their entire life on like trying to focus on this like relative perspective. That's a bit different than the point he's making because he's literally just looking about where you're standing next to something. But yeah, I like this idea of perspective, relativity, or your rel your your position relative to that thing can help kind of change the way you see it. I guess another view of this is is it the literal view from above like the first time you look down in your city from an airplane or something and you're like, "Wow, that's the same thing I was seeing before. >> It just looks very different now and it makes me feel something different and think something different." >> Yeah. Yeah. Also, what you're saying does connect to the next one as well, this point about, you know, things look different depending on what they're next to. [laughter] >> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So, we'll get into the next four. I think the next I think the next three are like less interesting to me. So I I've gone through them a bit quickly. We can stop and and pause as needed. The the next three are about how things appear differently kind of I would say because of qualities that are not necessary to them, qualities that are not essential to them. So one is that things appear differently depending on what they're next to. I think you're that's the exact the tall example probably falls better in that. Um so sand appears rough by itself but smooth in a beach. He says another is that things appear differently depending on what you're experiencing at the same time or what they're kind of mixed with. So the example here is that the sun appears differently depending on the atmosphere or the air like the color of the sunset. Still the same sun but now you're like wow it's beautiful and um kind of pink or oh it's it's um you know it's it's it's a normal yellow. That depends on something that's not essential to it. It's something that's being mixed with it. And the third argument is that the s things appear differently to us depending on their rarity which again is is is not an essential quality of the thing. It's a relative quality or a accidental quality you might say. I I really do love his quote here which is the sun is much more astonishing than a comet. But because we see the sun regularly, but the comet rarely, we are so astonished at the comet comet as to think it important, but not the sun. Any thoughts on those ones? I think that's an important point. I don't think I don't think it's valuable to do like the each specific difference. I don't know. Is that important? But um the the the I guess the relative positioning is good. >> Rarity is interesting. Um, again, I see these not as, oh, I can never know the truth of things. I see these more as like stoic challenges to overcome. Don't get excited by something just because it's rare and different and novel. You know, that that's part of stoicism, I think, is like thinking the sun is beautiful and amazing even though it's so much more everyday than a comet would be like one way to describe a stoic ethical goal. You know, really loving nature even though you're around it all the time. >> Yeah. Trying to see it as if for the first time. I think that's maybe an idea you get from Senica or certainly from later >> sort of modern stoics like Pier had uh I think the Stoics of course also align with this point about you know relative positioning you know you think you're poor when you're amongst a group of rich types you know if you just change neighborhoods you would you know think you are king of the street and so on whatever it is and that certain that relative positioning does put it I think puts a serious question mark next to a lot judgments, especially about social positioning, status, and so on. So, I do think that's a good good reminder. >> Yeah, that's that's what the Stoic's going to say. Like, you think you're this great person because you're this great athlete and you move cities and all you move cities to go to some training camp or something and all of a sudden you're a terrible athlete and your whole value, your whole conception of yourself breaks apart and you have this whole crisis. And the so's like, "This is ridic. You haven't changed at all. Something about your original belief was like really fragile. It wasn't really true because if it was true, it wouldn't break the second you're around other people." So there there's this kind of fragility to these relative comments or relative judgments as well. We want to be careful about them. >> Yeah. Yeah. Uh yeah, I think that I think that's a good reminder. And I do like the point about rarity. I think that things are rare. They get more have more value. Of course, there's these sort of economic arguments for that, but there's also the amount perhaps a surprise involved uh with seeing something rare and uh I think that connects in an interesting way to some of those stoic ideas about, you know, aiming not to be surprised, right? Trying because that's a sign of a kind of ignorance perhaps, um a sign that you know, you haven't seen the whole picture. Uh so I think I think there's something interesting there too. Well, I really like that because we've been emphasizing, well, the example I showed was a great one, right? You're not seeing the beauty in what you have. You know, you don't see the beauty in your spouse or your partner because you're with them every day. Um, so you kind of have lost sense of it. There's that there's that kind of way. you're you're overvaluing something like novel or new or something, but but you're flipping it to the negative example, which is like, well, you think this is like a terrible thing because it's surprised you or you didn't expect it, but you encounter and you handle more difficult things all the time. So, you're its rarity has distorted your perception. >> Yeah, that's well put. >> Great. So moving on to the last one and sexist himself says this is the most important. So he's not just about sense impressions. He says when we get to this one this is the one that is the big issue for ethical agreement. And this I think connects to the epic point you were making earlier which is the ninth argument is that things appear differently depending on our ways of life, customs, laws and religious beliefs. And he goes through and defines each of those and provides examples of each of those. But I'll just provide a simple quote. He says, 'We oppose each of these sometimes to itself, sometimes to each of the others. For example, we oppose custom to custom as follows. Some Ethiopians tattoo their babies, but we do not. Persians think it's proper to wear lurid ankle length clothing, while we think it improper. And Indians have sexual intercourse in public, while most other races think that it is shameful. And so I mean this is this is exactly like that passage from Epictitus where philosophy begins because we have disagreement. We have to find a source of truth to settle that disagreement. He has that one and then he has another one about preconceptions >> where he says it's it's clear to all of us that um you know what what strikes me as a just as a just outcome is not the same thing to a Persian for example or somebody from a different country. And then it's like we all we we we need to then find some criteria to figure out whose preconception is right and whose preconception is wrong. So again sexist is putting it as a impossible challenge. The stoics are just saying just got to be careful. Got to be intentional. Don't take your beliefs for granted is is another part of this where this I think is the most the unfilosophical person obviously believes their sense impressions but then just takes their customs, ways of life, laws and religious beliefs for granted. >> Mhm. And so the the philosophical project you have the kind of um I don't know sense impression skepticism but then you also have value skepticism about what what right and wrong what is right and wrong what is the right way to live and yeah like I said skeptics think we we can't get over that hurdle stoics think we can we just got have to be careful and don't take the stuff for granted start stoic start skeptically and build up to the stoic position Yeah, I think there's certainly something appealing in this line of thought. You know, if you're attracted to stoicism, other ancient philosophies, you know, that's evidence that you found perhaps your own tradition or parts of your own tradition wanting. And uh I think that just throws into you know stark sort of really stark relief about you know these disagreements about custom culture philosophy about you know what sorts of uh ways of life are better than others what kind what does justice look like what does courage look like and so on and uh you know so many debates about how to live there's you know there's just differences in time, space and are the ones, you know, these our modern cultures have landed on are these really the better ones or is it just you know just a matter of factors that have nothing to do about the truth really. So I think there's this such it is such an important issue and I think uh something that motivates probably people interested in ancient philosophy stoicism in general is a kind of dissatisfaction with at least parts of the current culture and then there's that question you know how far does that dissatisfaction go was the first move even the correct one and uh yeah that's a lots of stuff there of course but I think you know the back and forth is reason four has kept ism even if you're not going the whole way. >> Yeah. Then the whole project of philosophy is just building something back up from that skepticism. I the way you put it very right at the start. I never heard that before but clicked something for me. That idea of you know you might be drawn to philosophy because you find something lacking in your own system. It just never occurred to me that idea of, you know, somebody whose ethical value system suits them doesn't find a need to like look outside of it. The same person who, you know, if they're if they never got tricked, they were like, "Oh, that's a that's a that's a real dollar bill. Thank you." And there was never a fake dollar bill introduced, they would have no reason to develop this kind of sense impression skepticism, test the dollar bill, interrogate it. I I like that idea of, you know, if if your value system is if your value system is serving you, you might not need to live an examined life and maybe there's a predisposition to philosophy of people who feel some sort of disconnect between the system they were born into and um I don't know either their own intuitions or their own dispositions. >> Yeah, that yeah, I think that's that's that's certainly that's probably correct. I guess there there is also the issue of you know how stark is that rejection if you think about modern examples there's deart who tries to clear his mind of all beliefs essentially before you know thinking about what you know what can he believe it's really a skeptical attitude thinking about whether he's deceived by a demon and everything you know the table in front of him his memories uh a modern example would be thinking about a simulation perhaps >> yeah um and uh building up from there. Whereas is that what the stoic would do? Would they sort of clear the way and try to come to true beliefs in the same process? I'm not sure. They might have a little more built in from their experience or trusting of culture because it's a product of nature and you know nature has some kind of providence to it or some kind of order to it. So, um, >> yeah, I think the question >> the stoic answer is I mean, I like the >> So, a couple things there. First, even in my own metaphor, you're right, I don't get I'm not like it's not I'm 16. I'm at my first job. I get my first fake dollar bill and I go, "Oh my god, is the world real?" Like, I don't have this like earthshattering total skepticism moment. I just think, I got to be more careful not accepting fake money. So, it's like if I'm the kind of person in like one part of society I disagree with, I don't need to reject all of society. I can just be like, well, um, you know, I'm a proud Canadian, but I disagree with our the way we handle this one topic is fine. You don't need to like reject the entire skeptical system or adopt an entire skeptical system. The matrix analogy, you know, the simulation analogy is is is the is the daycart approach well put that that's the kind of contemporary paradigm for this. I need to question everything and I need to rebuild. And I think the skep the stoic answer to that, excuse me, is that we need to be that about good and bad because our our ideas of good and bad are so twisted. We need to throw everything out. It's at least what Epictitus would say. But we can hold on to some of our intuitions about what's preferred and dispreferred. Like a lot of those are pretty good because we know what it is to be a human. We have like they're going to be based in our nature. They're going to be based in our culture. But you're going to have to go full daycart with the good and bad because you've got that idea of what it means to be happy so entirely twisted. You got to throw it out and start from nothing. I I think that would be Epictitus' position at least. >> Yeah, that seems right to me. That seems right to me. I mean, what I do like about the stoic or sorry, the skeptics is this emphasis on disagreement and highlighting how it's more serious than just, you know, disagreement between two peers. know thinking about it as you know disagreement across time different cultures and then disagreement of course even with yourself across you know a few years ago how you thought about a given matter and uh not really privileging any particular perspective I think that's a >> yeah certainly not you're just because that's what you believe right now doesn't mean you three years ago is an idiot [snorts] or I I never thought about that across time like you might say well you know the Persians feel one way and the Greeks feel one way and how do we come to the right conclusion? You go back to those arguments at the stop and you'd say even the Persians disagree. The Persians disagree between themselves. They disagree as a country comparing them to themselves a hundred years ago. Like they would be like you go through those same kind of rules about like it's not just one homogeneous thing, right? Like and even you you didn't you know um you think you should be nice to people but you were in a grumpy mood two days ago and you were just a you were a jerk at the grocery store so you don't even agree with yourself through time and as you said so like how do you privilege over any of those because if you looked at it objectively it probably shouldn't be I just privilege what I'm feeling right now. That's probably a pretty pretty bad criteria of truth. >> Yeah. Yeah. I think so. I think the first several modes kind of funny though really you know like what if you were a fruit bat [laughter] then >> yeah you think you know so much about fruit imagine being a fruit bat it would be an entirely different don't you know be entirely different experience and it's like it's like the kind of mindbending stuff like what if you were a fruit bat combined with like what if you walked to the other side of this room [laughter] and then looked at the wall the wall would look slightly different and I'm having trouble balancing those kind of like the the the gap in those arguments seem wide. >> Great. Anything? Um I'll do a little summary of those little reminder of where of where we got to, but anything else to add before the summary? >> No, no. I I enjoyed it. I I think I took a stab at highlighting what I thought were good takeaways. So, I think we're ready for a summary. >> It was really helpful. So, argument today is that maybe you're a skeptic. Maybe you're listening to this because you're a skeptic and you're interested in different positions. You're probably listening to this because you're interested in stoicism. Um, and so and even ancient philosophy in general, the as Socrates said, unexamined life is not worth living. All ancient philosophy is pretty skeptical and I would say probably a bit more skeptical than our our modern default. And so we want to we want to adopt a discerning perspective. And to do that, we looked at the skeptics and some of their challenges to trusting our impressions. And if you internalize these challenges, if you if you believe them and understand them as arguments, you'll probably be a bit more discerning. Now, you don't have to agree with the skeptics and think you can't you can't overcome the challenges, but you should at least recognize that there's that they raise good points about why we should be careful about what we believe. And so we looked at nine arguments for why you should be careful about what you believe. And they were first different animals see the same thing differently. So different species disagree or perceive differently. Second even among the same species humans we disagree amongst ourselves. Even third even among the same person the senses disagree with each other. Fourth, even among the same sense, the experience changes and disagrees with itself depending on how we are disposed. That was if we're if we're tired, old, young, these kinds of things. If we ate something differently beforehand, even among the same disposition, we perceived things differently depending on our relative location. That was that, you know, I I I I look from above or I view something from a from a different angle. >> [snorts] >> Then there was um three arguments about why things perceive differently depending on their combinations with other things or I would say things that aren't essential to them. First, things appear differently depending on what you're experiencing at the same time. Seven, things appear differently depending on what they're next to their what they're relative to. Eight, things appear differently depending on their rarity. And then the ninth argument is that things appear differently depending on our on social factors or our beliefs, our ways of life, customs, laws, and religious beliefs as they put it. And these are all things that can distort our ability, even if you're not a full skeptic, you agree, distort our ability to perceive things accurately. And so they're things to be on the watch out for. And reasons to employ the stoic skill of proke and mindful attention. >> Yeah, absolutely. I think they are a challenge for whenever you're just relying on maybe an intuition or you know things seem to you like such and such a way and uh force you to be explicit about you know the principles you're relying on in your thoughts uh the arguments behind your beliefs uh and such. So I think that's um at the very least a kind of a kind of forcing function in or yeah something that act could can act as a forcing function in addition to perhaps engendering a general skeptical attitude. >> Yeah, I think that's great. I think that's a great way to end it is that because these things are true, you need a criterion of truth to justify your claims. You can't just say well this is the right way to live because this was the way world I was born into or this is uh what my society says because societies disagree you know you can't just say well this is what I think because other humans disagree with you or you disagree with yourself two years ago. So obviously that you believe it can't be the right criterion. Um and so I think you put it really perfectly Caleb. a it's a kind of a a call to action to be really clear about what what um makes something true and what doesn't and and have a justification for those arguments. >> Awesome. Thanks, Michael. >> Thank you. >> Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found [music] this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancientlar.com and please get in touch with us at stoa at stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
