---
title: "Reflections from Athens"
slug: reflections-from-athens
youtube_id: OMNmg3Qf-6E
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMNmg3Qf-6E
upload_date: 2026-04-21
duration: 11:29
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to So Conversations. My name's Caleb Monttoveros with another short solo podcast. We'll have some conversations from Michael and I coming soon. I recently had the chance to go to Athens, the fortune to visit Athens, Greece, and I thought it might be uh good to chat about some reflections from that trip, from that pilgrimage, if you will. I uh got the chance to go to the Stoa Poille, the birthplace of Stoicism. where xeno city I'm taught it's uh currently being excavated I visited Athens back in 2012 as well 2012 or 2013 I believe it was being excavated at that point as well so it must be quite the project mostly the foundations are visible but it's not in great shape the um adjacent Athenian agora is far better preserved and remarkable to walk through the stoic uh which of course means painted porch that is uh is really just a much closer to a foundation in some rubble that of course brings to mind thoughts of impermanence. Something that so wrote constantly about which has a kind of irony to it. Of course, they remind us about the temporary nature of things and yet the site endures. The philosophy of stoism endures. People still visit for that reason millennia later. And even as it's just a sight of uh ruins where uh the bustling philosophical life once was the uh it was a kind of energy of the place that still comes through amongst all the touristical attractions and tourists like myself. Overall, visiting a city, Athens is a, as far as indifference go, certainly a preferred one, it's a wonderful thing, at least for an American like myself. The city has ancient roots, of course, but that was almost a near east feel. And as I was saying, as I've been there before, more than a decade ago now, and it feels it felt more vibrant to me. And um you know I know I'm no travel expert by any means and I I think many say European travel guys and such or proper cosmopolitans will accurately see Athens as a top tier European city but it's not necessarily probably going to be in the list of top five cities, even top 10. Many people will visit Athens on their way to one of the Greek islands, which are also worth visiting. I didn't get any chance to see any this trip, but I have uh but I had was able to my last my last visit. And those are um there's I mean there are so many islands, but let's just say several that are worth visiting. The ones you'd expect might be slightly overrated uh but there are certainly underrated ones as well. At any rate, even though Athens may not be at the cul of the list for many, if you're interested in philosophy, interested in the ancient world, that perhaps shifts your calculus and rightly so. I think it's a worthy candidate to visit if you get the chance. And um if I was a nomad or anything of that sort, I could certainly see Athens being on the top of the list in terms of a place to end up for perhaps for a few years. But that's not uh that's not the life I've chosen to live for better or worse. So if you do get the chance, of course you have to see the Acropolis with the Parthonon. It has a detailed and well constructed museum that one must also visit. Probably some of the one of the best examples of architectural modernism really. Again, I'm no architectural expert, but I believe it's done in a modernist style, which doesn't always work, but in this case, I think it it works it works very well. And you can also visit the lysum where Aristotle taught, which I did. Again, that's another place where you see the foundations. But otherwise, there's not too much left. It's not like some of the temples where you have those pillars freezes and so on. Even in worse condition is Plato's Academy which I I didn't get a chance to see this time but uh still remains. that's still there even if it's just remains. Something that I saw and that made me that kicked off a thread for me, something I might write about some more is um in one of the museums I visited, there was a copy of an Edward Lear painting. He's done many landscape works of Greece. This is an in the uh 19th century. It's entitled imaginary representation of Athens during the classical period. And um I actually haven't seen a digitized copy of it. If someone has it on hand, you should you should send it to send it to me to email us at stoa stomeditation.com. If you have it on file, I did a quick search and I haven't found it. The the painting shows the Acropolis at the highest point, the temple center, and it's a depiction of a respplendant classical city, but not in a crowded way. It's still spacious, seen from above. And it brought to mind this thought that Athens itself is in a way imaginary in two senses. First, there's the epistemic sense. A lot of our thoughts on the classical period are reconstructed from fragments and what we know we often add details to guesses. In other cases, one must one must describe them as embellishments. So there's that sense, but there's also the aspirational sense in the way that Athens is seen as an ideal, a paradigm worth emulating. We have Socratic inquiry as a way of life. citizens taking their membership in the polace seriously at its best and erade their identities deeply bound up with the fate of the city and yet they remain individuals and uh of course it's not entirely fictional it approximates reality but Athens is almost to the city as the sage is to the individual a platonic form if you will and a uh myth in the best sense, something to aspire to, something worth depicting in art as Edward Leer did, but also philosophy, works of fiction. We have of course the myths, the Greek myths that are and all these things are worth living inside of immersing oneself in both for emulation but also intrinsically for what Athens was. at any and anyway I think that's an interesting thread to think about and uh is uh at least for me is perhaps been best unders the meaning of Athens as a city is it's interesting to think of that is best captured in art whether that's paintings sculpture and of course the works of philosophy that we have um and that's that something and it to see it as something as an ideal, certainly something the Athenian citizens were themselves in reality concerned with as well, whether in the theoretical sense, current certain philosophy or just in the purely physical sense, the way they capture the way they use mathematics in constructing their buildings, uh, but also depict the human form. in beautiful ways. So, that's a brief that's just a brief uh meditation, if you will, on some uh on a line of thought that my visit sparked off something I'll be thinking about some more. Let me know if it Let me know what you think or if uh and let me know what you think. if you all have any other thoughts on Athens particular as a city as a destination. But um and uh this won't be and I of course this won't be turning into a uh travel podcast by any means. Michael will be back soon and we'll have some uh more conversations between us shortly. As always, let us know if you have any feedback, thoughts, comments, questions. Stoa meditation.com. Thanks for listening.
