---
title: "Seneca On The Creation of Earthquakes (Episode 190)"
slug: seneca-on-the-creation-of-earthquakes
episode_number: 190
youtube_id: pa_5cfN-LS4
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pa_5cfN-LS4
upload_date: 2025-07-01
duration: 47:28
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to STOA Conversations. My name is Caleb Montiveros and I'm Michael Trombler and today we're going to be doing a movie review. So, we had a listener reach out. Um, is anything wrong or you just was dancing in excitement for the movie review. We're back. Just getting pumped. Yeah. So, we're doing another one of our critically acclaimed movie reviews. In the past, we've reviewed 300 uh Gladiator. Maybe that's it. I feel like there was one other film that we reviewed as well. This is number three. So, this is number three or four. And we had a listener reach out and ask what our thoughts were about the new Senica movie. And uh neither of us had seen it, so we just watched it. And um yeah, that's what we'll talk about for this episode. It's a sort of modern depiction, a unique modern depiction of Senica's life and death. Really? Yeah. Let's jump into it. Cool. Cool. So the movie it's called Senica on the creation of earthquakes. Stars John Malkovich uh great actor in my view. Um it also has Mary Luis Parker playing Agraina, the mother of Nero. Directed by a fellow named Robert Shvanki. Sorry if I butchered your last name, Robert. Um I don't think I've seen any of his other films. Have you seen any of his other stuff, Michael? No, I haven't. Gotcha. I gotcha. Well, it's uh Yeah. So this this came out it was released 2023. It's available for streaming on most of the major platforms to my knowledge. And uh it's an interesting film. I think it's a kind of film that you'll it's a little bit of an artouse type film and you'll either love it or hate it type film and uh most people aren't too much of a fan of it. I think it's fair to say it's Rotten Tomatoes ratings is at around 29%. IMDb is at 5 out of 10 and so on. though it doesn't have a uh maybe it's uh set up for having a little bit of a cult following or something like this but it's certainly more of a artouse type film a personal film and at least some people enjoyed it because uh whoever reached out to us mentioned they they enjoyed some of the themes that it covers and it does cover some of the challenges I would say stoic some particular sen have always faced and sort of these broader themes about how to uh reconcile style, stoicism in positions of power and how to respond to tyranny um as a philosopher and as an artist I would say. So regardless of sort of the merits of the film, it brings out a lot of important questions uh that that we can discuss. So I'm excited to talk about it. Yeah, it's definitely not. I mean, I think part of that bad that low review is that when you think ancient Rome, you think gladiator, you know, you think this kind of epic historical movie, maybe some great fight scenes. This is not We'll get into the plot, but this is not what this movie is. This is a lot of people talking to each other. was reading some reviews about it talking about how maybe it's more kind of like a a play almost that's very conversational not really any set pieces other than people in rooms discussing philosophy and discussing kind of what's going on and then I would think the other thing about it I mean we we'll get into the plot but I think it also doesn't it doesn't idealize senica it doesn't necessarily depending on your reading of it make stoicism look very good um I enjoyed the fact that it took the philosophy seriously. Like, it's nice. It's it's it's great to get a two-hour movie that engages with stoicism, even if that's kind of critically, or the Senica's character, even if that's critically, but it um I think maybe you're then alienating kind of two audiences. You got the kind of the historical epic audience that thinks that's not very epic, and then the stoicism audience goes, "Hey, you've kind of made Senica look like not that great of a person." Um, and maybe that I think that might contribute to its low score as well. Yeah, absolutely. Well, what were your overall uh impressions of the film? I think we'll start talking about our overall impressions and then uh jump into a playbyplay and pick out some of the main themes. But what were your overall impressions of the film? I mean, I I thought the film was really challenging. Um, it portrays Senica as a flawed person, as a person who comes up um approaches his death with a lot of fear and then also possibly with a lot of conceit, attempting to die well as almost the performance. Um caring a lot about what people think about how he's going to die. And so on one hand, you know, saying the stoic things, um, acting in the stoic ways or at least repeating the stoic lines, but I I I read the undertext is, you know, not meaning those genuinely, not kind of talking the talk, but not walking the walk or doing so in a very difficult way. Um, you know, really struggling with the fact that he's been ordered to commit suicide by Nero. Really caring about what that's going to mean for his legacy. uh almost um wanting to live up to this ideal of Socrates making that kind of appeal to other philosophers who have died well in the past but also clearly being kind of doing this for shallow reasons or or at least partially shallow reasons. And so in that sense I thought it was it was it was challenging, right? Like we we talk we like stoicism on this podcast. We like I generally like Senica's writing um and we talk about these people as role models, right? we do the um contemplate the sage exercise and you think maybe I don't use senica as a sage that much for me but I I certainly use epictitus and marcus Aurelius and you think about these kind of big three of stoicism and so to take one of these people and say well were they really that great um you know did they really live up to the philosophy um it was challenging and it it left me thinking about yeah what it really means to put stoicism into practice versus to put on the heirs of being a philosopher which is the which is the fundamental question. I also found it at points boring and at points maybe like like long long- winded. So, it wasn't like it was I I don't I didn't think it was a 10 out of 10, but I did do think it was challenging and made me think, which I appreciate about any thing about something I've thought as much about as stoicism to to come at it from a different angle was was appreciated. So, overall, I felt like it was a is a film that was sort of, as I said earlier, kind of a love it or hate it film. and I almost loved it, but I wouldn't say I hated it. Of course, it's a little bit too far, but it didn't really land for me with some exceptions. Uh, I think it it does sort of there's always this question about Senica. Was he a hypocrite? Uh, he's just a political player who put on stoic philosophy as a performance, as a political play. And, uh, this film certainly takes that as fact. This film generally takes, you know, the more cynical reading of Senica. It does make him seem a little bit more long- winded and I think a part of that the film itself seemed to drag on. I also agree at parts it was it was boring and uh it almost took too cynical of a framing of Senica in a way that made it less challenging I perhaps wanted to put it. Uh you know Senica almost becomes a caricature of a character as as do some other characters in this film. Nero Agraina I think but I found the the depiction of one of Senica's plays Thiestes particularly haunting and hard to watch in a way that I thought about it later which is I think a mark of uh if not a good piece of art something that's worth yeah watching is so I I did think about that later and perhaps it's not how I would portray that play but it was I felt like a legitimate piece within the the movie as a whole. So, there were some there certainly were some positive things to say about it and I I think it's a good excuse to just talk about Senica's life and the framing of it. So, uh and anything that does that is uh is is fun to talk about. Yeah, I did think I also thought about it later, which is a good sign. Um even if it wasn't one of my favorites, it was yeah, it was a piece of art that I thought about um later on. But yeah, let's get into the plot. We'll kind of frame it up and then jump into some themes from there. Cool. Cool. So, the general plot is the short timeline is, you know, gives gives you a little bit of a a taste of what Nero's uh of what Senica's life was like at the Court of Nero. He's trying to control Nero. He's trying to improve Nero's character, his rhetoric. Of course, it doesn't work. He gets thrown out of the court. And then Nurero is sick of Senakica. He sees as a pompous bastard, right? And uh orders him to kill himself and he has this message delivered to Senica. Basically, as Senica's hanging out with all of his rich friends, he's just staged this play, Thiestes that I mentioned. Senica hears the news and he has to come to term terms with it with his friends who are keen on leaving now that Senica has been sentenced to death. They don't want to be affiliated with this man anymore. And uh one by one, Senica's friends, so-called friends, slaves leave him and he dies alone, which is not at all like parts of it do do fit in the historical narrative that we get from Tacitus. You know, Senica's death scene is almost over the top. He's he's ordered to commit suicide and the variety of different methods don't work. Um so the film does that display that accurately but the you know you sort of get the picture from Tacitus that he's surrounded by his slaves his friends and you know dies a philosopher's death even if it's a full of perhaps a kind of dark a dark dark comedy of these different methods failing uh but in this film Senica dies alone uh he's been been alienated by uh his friends and servants so that's a short playbyplay play. No, I think that's it. It's it's it's just the film about Senica finding out he's going to die. He's been condemned to suicide and then having to wrestle with that and then kill himself. Um and so, you know, it's the it's the stoic challenge of like dying well or at least the Socratic challenge um that that came into stoicism later is like this is the there's there's this often theme in ancient Greek philosophy of like that's this real test of your philosophy. you know, philosophy. I think Socrates referred to dying philosophy as a preparation for dying well. And so, Senica is faced with that challenge. And we get to see Senica kind of blunder his way through it. um really kind of overintellectualize and recite all of these stoic teachings, but at the same time kind of act cowardly, like really be bitter and angry at the people that are leaving. Um him alienate the people that remain. Um have his wife commit suicide the way the film portrays it almost, you know, out of selfishness. Like he doesn't want her to keep living. He wants to kind of be such a great teacher that she or such a great, you know, husband that she's like, I can't live without you. Kind of wants her to die to kind of cement his legacy. And my understanding is the historical record, she does attempt to commit suicide. And then when Nero finds out, kind of stops her and has her wounds bandaged. And in this film, she she just dies. It's kind of more cynical than that. you know, he's he's trying to talk to Lchilius and Lchilius slaps him in the face and is like, "Stop talking." Like, "I've got it. I don't want to hear this anymore." And just kind of leaves him to die alone. Um, it's really quite So, yeah. No, you that's that that's the story, but then it's like all these all these cynical steps along the way. Even that portrayal of the play um that you spoke to earlier like in that scene he he there's this there's this moment where you know two is it is it a sacrifice or what's the function? Two people are killed as part of the play. Yeah. It's a story of Thess. Yeah. And so he has actual slaves, like actual humans killed as kind of like performance art, but they actually die. So there's just all these kind of terrible moments of I think ethical failure as he kind of navigates this last day of his life. Yeah. That that's the that's the play in the nutshell is like that the drama of that that tension and that that situation. Yeah. So um that's that's the plan. That's the movie in a nutshell. I think it is accurate to in some way I think it is accurate to call it as a a play does have that kind of feel. It's interesting that one intentional choice about the movie we haven't touched on yet is that there's a mix of modern and ancient. So Nero gets the term the president uh as opposed to the emperor. So there's certainly some sort of political readings one could have about the film from that that kind of choice. I think. Yeah. Yeah. There's another scene where the rich people are watching Senica's play and one of them is like, "Oh, I hope he doesn't make this political." You know, like, "I'll I'll watch whatever, just don't make it political." And then it kind of turns political. And they're like, "Oh." Um, which I guess is probably tongue and cheek with this same kind of president reference here to Nero. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Then you get a quick um before you know you go to this uh scene of Senica in his villa with his rich friends. You get some other cuts from the uh Nero's uh Senica's life at court. There's um Nero's decision to kill his wife. Octavia get his own I get a new wife I think Mary basically his mistress and then there's also this short scene of Nero killing his mother which I mean both those episodes are it's in this film sort of rendered as approximately correct I do think Nero's mother Agraina is very interesting and maybe I think it could be given more of an interesting I understand this film is not about but a very interesting figure kind of figure who actually she wrote a biography that we lost. Um, but she's a kind of character who schemed Nero, essentially scheme Nero into and killed uh Nero into the his position in this in this movie, the position of president. Um, but was clearly a pretty savvy political player, but I think comes off as a little less savvy uh in this movie. And Nero kills her directly. In the historical record, he had her assassinated. I don't think he killed her directly. Um, and Senica is of course in a movie there, Agraina reaches out her hand for help and Senica turns turns the other way. You know, he's uh complicit. I think that what the scene shows he's complicit in Nero's uh ruthlessness, his desecration of the office, and when he does stand up against Nero, it's really just given it's not with a firm backbone, right? He's tries to talk his way into Nero showing mercy in a specific scene, but shuts up as soon as he gets slapped. I don't know. I felt like Egyptina got a short short stick in addition to to to Senica. I wish uh I wish she could have gotten a a little better treatment. Yeah. I mean, nobody's portrayed particularly well. It's kind of like an equally there's no real heroes in this one. and she's also the one that brought Senica back from exile um to tutor uh Nero. So involved in Senica's position and Senica's story as well. Yeah, absolutely. So after those short scenes, then we go to Senica's villa where he's with a bunch of his rich friends, artsy type friends perhaps, fashionable people. you know, they're dressed in a flamboyant manner and uh he's shown Senica's rendition of Thiestes and Thiestes is a brutal play. It's about you know the house of Atrius cursed house of Atrius and the short version of this story is Thastes is like Senica called back to politics called back to meet his brother Atrius. Um they have a blood feud of sorts because uh Thastes was exiled I believe after uh committing adultery with Atrius's wife. Um and then Atrius in the great act of revenge has Thieste's children killed and uh served to Thastes as a meal. So it's a brutal play. These doesn't know and then it's revealed and uh it is an actual rendition. Senica did write a version of Thiestes their previous plays of of this myth of course and um it's probably one part of this film that's positive is is it is probably the kind of thing that would have been shown in private. You know, it's not a play to be shown in a large auditorium, but it is possible that, you know, the real historical Senica had his plays put on by his servants or actors he knew in his own villas for the sake of his friends. Yeah, it's a fun portrayal of how these plays would be shown and talked about, not not like the movie theaters today, but these kind of intimate performances. Yeah, you do you have some funny comments. So, I like how there was a comment about, "Oh, Senica is going to make this so over the top," you know, which is a common complaint about Senica's plays that they're a spectacle really. You know, we covered media and, you know, Senakica's plays are very ornate, violent, dark, and uh arguably have this political overtones as as as the film as the film pulls out. Mhm. Which is just funny. It's funny to have I mean he that's the kind of way Senic is portrayed. He's portrayed over top over the top in his playwriting and then over the top in his philosophizing, right? Like instead of just instead of just like being straight to the point or being like, "Oh, I'm afraid of death or something." He's got to be like this give this big dramatic stoic line about, you know, how everybody will die eventually and how it's nothing to be feared other than like going back to sleep or something like this. And it's it's all kind of portrayed as being very dramatic kind of like the play as well. Yeah, absolutely. But as soon as he gets the announcement that he's, you know, ordered to commit suicide, um, he tries to get out of it is, you know, the sense one gets, which, uh, you know, sort of punctures this image that he's not afraid of death. He tries to get out of it and then when he doesn't, he immediately shifts his perspective to like, okay, I've got to look the coolest. I've got to die well, which means preserving my legacy and really like putting on a show for the people that are still here, you know, making them making them see a follow-up show, which is the death of the death of me just the same way, you know, aspiring to the likes of Socrates. Yeah, absolutely. You have so you have his scribe taking notes and he's like, "All right, I'm going to die, so I'm going to give a speech about some of the, you know, important doctrines of stoicism and how I've lived up to them." And I don't know if you you caught it, but the the scribe is Lucille. Yeah. Calls him by name, which is which I thought was very funny. Um, which is the letters on ethics or the letters to Lucilius. Um, yeah. Yep. Yeah. Absolutely. Um and you know Lucilius also plays Thiestes in the play. So he has his servants performing these um these roles which yeah just a highlight I did think that that play particularly uncomfortable to watch. It's a difficult story. It does have he does have two you know Thestes children are slaves. they are killed in the play which is difficult to see the I'm not sure about the historical truth of that but there are Christian writers Dutian writes about an episode where um slaves would be killed in the coliseum for public spectacle um perhaps as as a part of plays uh or short stories um or you know maybe there's a little bit of a mythical interlude and slaves would be killed then. So it wouldn't be totally out of the question, but it it seems somewhat given our actual record of Senica, it does seem somewhat unlikely that would have in fact been uh what he uh would have done, especially since he promote he does have a few words about treating slaves well. I think that that's probably a little bit too cynical about uh over reading. Yeah. And a condemnation of the coliseum cynica, you know. Yeah. Yeah. Condemns that as well in his in his ethical writing there. Yeah. There is a clear um sort of space the slaves are given in the film that I thought was interesting and generally well done. There there's this particular scene where some of Senica's friends are leaving and the camera highlights over the slaves that are going to carry the friends back home and I think gives them a kind of space that shows how, you know, that separate they are from the concerns of, you know, these rich people. I thought that was well done though. I don't know if you noticed that at all, but I thought like they're it showed how uh almost, you know, invisible they were to these these rich Romans and how little, you know, the rich Romans concerns really mattered for them, mattered to them. Yeah. And I don't think any of them were ever spoken directly to. They're like carrying people around. they're like following through on their implicit instructions or orders, but they're they're not part of conversation or anything like um they are these background pieces, but as you said, it's shot in a way that kind of draws attention to the fact that there are these humans that are these background pieces. It was definitely the the saddest portrayal of Roman slavery that I've seen. um just because of that because I think often if you get Roman slaves it's like even if they're dying in the coliseum there's like some sort of act of agency or they're fighting or they're maybe a character in some regard here it was just like we we yeah it was kind of tragic in that betrayal. this is a story about a certain uh certain class of Romans and the slaves are involved in that but they're not part of the story which is kind of this like Yeah. which I thought was uh I I can't speak to the historical accuracy of that but it was uh it was it was sad to see. Yeah. Yeah. So I thought that was that's something I think one could say in the in favor of the of the film perhaps. Um, and another sort of challenging element of course when uh evaluating the Romans. Uh, so let's see where do we want to go from here. We've got so you know Sen receives the news. He starts going on in as bombastic way as John Malkovich who does do generally a pretty good job I think of Senica. Uh he is I think a good a good person to play play the character. Um and uh his friends end up leaving him. You know, Senak has a mark on him. He's politically risky to uh affiliate with. And uh Senak has some sharp words for his friends who leave. You know, he's like, "You guys are at least to to one couple who leaves." He's like, "Yeah, all you guys care about is money." And they're like, "Well, Senica, you became rich being mean the ghostriter of a tyrant. What are you talking about?" And he's like, "Oh, well, you know, your relationship to wealth is totally different from my relationship to wealth. I'm seeing it as a mirror and different and you all live for it and crave it and so on." And there is something to that as a criticism of these people. And it's clearly, it's interesting because it's clearly an accurate criticism of these people, but at the same time, you see Senica just sort of as uh you don't take him that seriously, you know, in the film. And you also see that someone's like, "Senica is like,"Wh are you getting so angry?" And oh, I'm not angry. I'm just, you know, issuing my judgment over these people. That's a a perfect stoic retort. You know, I'm not angry. I'm just uh No, she says, "Yeah, like I don't uh you don't they don't deserve your wrath." And he's like, "Right, right. I judge. I um" He says all these things to do, but I but I you know, I don't feel wrath. But while he's like seething with anger, right? Yeah. Well, he's you know livid that his friends are leaving. Um I found that partic that that's the part I think where the film became difficult to watch. You know, he's just giving these long speeches. His friends are obviously leaving him and that he convinces his wife to die with him, you know, to commit suicide with him because that would be more beautiful, you know, more of a perhaps a way to model the life. uh the Senica once modeled, you know, this is the way to end it. I die with my loving wife. That's how it's recorded for centuries. You just the sort of thing a Stoic shouldn't really care about. In Tacitus, it's written that Paulina, Senica's wife, decides to die with him. But, you know, this film has the much more cynical reading as as we mentioned uh that Paulina sort of portrayed as a little bit of an airhead, an adulteress, uh is is convinced to die with uh with Senica. And it's left unclear whether she does die or not. Eventually, two of Senica's servants run off with her and try to prevent her from dying. So I, you know, I think he's lost two servants at that point. All of his friends have left and now he's just left with Lucille and you know this this Roman who's been given the message that he's going to die and if he doesn't commit suicide, the Roman soldier will kill him the next morning. Yeah. And then then we get to the end, right, which is I guess maybe let's just finish. Let's let's go through to the end because we're we're Oh, yeah. Oh, we get Senica's death scene. Dark darkly comedic. Slits his wrists. That doesn't work. Tries to take hemlock. He has a fever dream. And he talks about the um stoic metaphysics actually. So, you get the sort of this this cyclical nature of things and then everything's going to die uh perish and and fire. That part is actually pretty pretty neat. And then, you know, he feels like he's going to die. And then, you know, of course, he, you know, wakes up and he thinks like, "Oh, I dreamt of sweet meats. Still not dead." Uh, so then he he up a bath. Lucilius leaves him. That's a part where he's like, you know, I'm tired of all your speeches. I think I have enough notes to preserve your legacy. Peace. Uh, you know, heats up heats up a warm bath uh for himself. Uh, is too afraid to get in. The Roman centurion pushes him and, you know, he hits his head or something like that. And that's eventually how how things end. So he doesn't die. He doesn't really meet his death with stoic serenity. I think in the very end he's uh trying to avoid stepping into this bath. Uh and it I think you know his last words were I'm scared. It hurts me. So the movie doesn't do do much for Senica's legacy in that respect. Uh, and that's how it ends. Yeah, it's sad. Um, or I don't know, pathetic. Yeah, it's a bit pathetic. And then there's that there's that there's a scene where they carry Senica's body away and the person is kind of driving his horse or driving riding riding his horse and he's passing all these modern power lines. So again, there's like this he he's riding through like a modern you know, modern power station with like electrical wires and stuff. So, there's that again that kind of interface between the Roman and the modern and then the brief scene where Nero's Nero's death by suicide um later. Um so, it's just like everybody meets this terrible end, this kind of really pathetic display of either cowardice or bad actions that lead to death. Um, yeah, I've got some thoughts on some themes. Yeah. Yes. Let's pull out some themes. So, um, I think there's two main themes I took from this. It's not, you know, it's not it's not exactly it's not exactly gladiator. We get this nice, uh, you know, kind of, I guess, moral or happy ending. Two themes I got from this. One is this question of hypocrisy. As you, as you said, I think you can view Senica as a hypocrite. uh somebody who like manipulates stoicism for his own personal benefit and then fails to live up to the call of stoicism when it matters. And then I think in that reading the interesting question to me is like how do we treat Senica as if that reading is true and Senica is a hypocrite. How do we treat his philosophy? And I think that the the answer I came to was that there really needs to be this distinguishing between philosopher and then maybe like a teacher or a communicator. And I think even if Senica is a hypocrite, basically you can separate the art from the artist. And philosophy is a craft. So in order to be a good philosopher, you need to be a good person. You can't be a good philosopher and hypocrite. You can't be a good stoic and a and a coward and wrathful and in love with money, but you can still be somebody who's great at writing about stoicism. You can still be somebody that's good about talking about stoicism. So, I don't think even if Senica is a hypocrite, I guess it doesn't have that many implications for the way that we engage with the with his writing. I think sometimes it it's nice to have that kind of moral certaintitude of like, wow, Senica's a role model of mine. He writes he he writes this really insightful stuff. He's such a great person, but I I think it's okay if he was a hypocrite. I don't think that makes his writing any less valuable. You know, same thing if we discovered some sort of text that said I really, you know, admire Epictitus. We discovered some sort of text that Epictitus was a terrible person or something. I'm not sure how much that undermines the content of the communication, undermines their quality as a philosopher. They were not a good stoic by that criteria. But I I still think even if Senico is a hypocrite, his letters to Lchilius is a valuable resource, right? His his writings are valuable stoic resources. So the hypocrisy thing is an interesting to think about. Interesting thing to think about. I'm not sure if it has implications to how you should study him as somebody who has interesting things to say. Yeah, it's such an interesting question. I think there's sort of um there different ways to frame this but one way to think about the question is you know if you see you can completely separate the philosophy from the philosophers as it were and just think about you know I just want to evaluate the ideas on their merits and see you know determine whether they're true or not and if you're doing that then you can still get value out of someone's writing even if they fail to live up to their ideals or even if they were a bad person. On the other hand, you kind of have this, you know, view that, you know, philosophy is biography, maybe more niche type style view and the the philosophy says something about the person or perhaps um and the art can't be separated from the artist as it were and you have you can have that view to more or less uh strong intensities. Um I my view might be something like Perhaps the hypocrisy shows certain kinds of failure modes about a given philosophy or temptations risks to a philosophy that might be unique to it. So that's not sufficient to write off the philosophy. But there is something to say critiques of stoicism in particular that uh perhaps if you took the fool if you took this cynical reading of Senica as the correct one which I think we should have serious question marks about. If this was completely correct, this would show that I think some critiques of stoicism framed as risks of stoicism, maybe not reasons to write it off completely would be correct in a sense. They would land. So, you know, this idea that you can use stoicism to justify this the status quo, use it to work with a tyrant perhaps uh is a good one. Or perhaps something that's a little bit more challenging is this idea that stoicism is impossible. And in a certain sense, Senica must know that. So you sort of have this question, you know, why is he taking it on to begin with? It's probably for some other ulterior motive. If so, if you really can't say face death in the stoic way, then it does seem like it becomes more of a performance. And perhaps that's I suppose that's just the to to me I suppose that's probably the version of the this criticism that maybe is the strongest is that yeah stoism in its extreme form leads itself to a kind of performance because you can't actually meet that standard. So then what's the role the philosophy is playing for you? Yeah that's really interesting. My second theme, I'm going to come back to that, but the second theme I wanted to bring up was this idea that um yeah, what does it say about stoicism itself versus Senica the person? And I think what it says about stoicism itself on one way you can read this as like kind of a mockery or criticism of stoicism because here's this guy who pretends to be a stoic and then you know he just ends up being kind of a crappy person when he's faced with death. But then what I was thinking is well it's not really a criticism of stoicism because we don't admire Senica. We think he's being we think he's acting pathetically in a way. We think he's being embarrassing when he acts like this in the movie. We don't admire him. And the fact that we don't admire him shows the admirability of stoicism. Like how much would we admire the person that was actually able to do genuinely what Senica's performing. Able to actually confront death with courage. Able actually to say goodbye to his friends without being angry with them. Um so Senica is performing this but it's not a criticism stoicism because you yeah performance is bad but the genuine ability to do it is is clearly good. That was going to be my second point but your point is well the criticism comes not in the idealization of the sage. Obviously, the sage is beautiful, but it's almost like a pragmatic criticism of stoicism, which is that you either it's either impossible to become the sage, so what's the point? Or you can get away with being pretty bad at stoicism for a long time and pretending like you're not because it ends up being quite permissive or you're able to justify a lot of positions as being stoic as long as you're not caught being like emotionally dramatic in the moment, right? Like when Senica is super angry, but he's like, "Oh, I'm not angry. I'm just judging." You know, you can get a you can kind of pretend to be stoic pretty well. Anyway, I think that's a I'm just I'm just adding to what you're saying. I think that was a really I think that's a really interesting question. It's a maybe it works as a pragmatic not a criticism of the end. Obviously, he would have been a really cool guy if he was able to pull it off, but a pragmatic criticism of stoicism in practice. It's like people can pretend to be it or it's impossible even to become the goal and so what's the purpose of it? Yeah. Yeah. That's how I would see it. So I suppose if I were to draw out two two themes myself uh taking a leaf from your book as it were. One would be that quite maybe similar to to what you just said, but one would be that you could sort of see this perhaps as an uh ant you could see this version of Senica as an antiodel. You know, someone who's performing stoicism, someone who's in the position of teaching stoicism. And in fact, his teachings are good. Uh they're valuable. But his failure to live up to the ideals in his life or just you know ideals that would be common sense make him a kind of render him a kind of antimodel. I think that that's challenging and I think always a good reminder you know at least for me or probably for you as well as someone who is in the position of you know sharing stoic ideas to you know hold yourself to account. Um so so that that's one key theme. Uh certainly. Yeah. I mean, you hit the nail on the head. I think when you said performance that made it click click for me because there's a thing he puts on the play and then he goes and he tries to put on another play at home when he dies. It's it is really a criticism of stoicism as performance. Um I think that's bang on. And I guess that I guess the nuance there is that that's easier to do the more power you have. You know, if nobody's listening to you, if nobody takes you as an authority, there's not really much value to the performance. Like, okay, good for you. Thumbs up. But the more power you have, the more easy it is to and and this would be the Christmas Senica, you know, when you're super rich, it's easy to pretend to be the kind of person that would do fine under pressure. But you don't really have that kind of pressure or you I don't know, you weasle your way out of your kind of ethical requirements. We see Senica justifying everything he did as well. I was, you know, if I wasn't there, Nero would have been even worse. Yeah, I let him kill his mom. Um, yeah, I let him do all these things, but it just because I was standing next to him made it 20 30% better. And is that not the best thing you can do? And that's kind of seen as like an it's portrayed as a bit of a a weasel out of the requirements. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a difficult issue. And I certainly want uh anyone thinking about Senica's legacy should should wrestle with. I think that is a there is this I think the g the standard story about Nero's reign is that when Senica Agraina and another adviser Burus were in power during Nero's earlier life things went fairly well. Um but as Nero grew older grew in power things started going downhill a bit. I think another theme that's related to this is you can sort of see the film as a criticism of art in general you have uh especially political art uh I think the the work of this you know the rendition of thest in the film is a veiled criticism of Nero but it's ultimately ineffectual you know it's given to these rich friends of Senica who do nothing about Nero's reign. It's put on by Senica who is one of the figures who could do something about the matter but doesn't. Um and in the end, you know, the the work just results in uh two sla innocent slaves being killed. And I I think that's, you know, so I think that points to a kind of a kind of veiled criticism of of a kind of political art perhaps that doesn't that's consumed by relatively well-off people uh but is ultimately kind of ineffectual. Well, is that is that theme just a similar kind of theme? Like is that theme again just performance like this idea of except performance in the political space instead of the philosophical space? It is again just kind of like yeah saying the things you're supposed to say but not not going the extra step and following through like somebody with political power making a political statement instead of going and you know changing something with Nero. Um maybe it's not that maybe it's not like a one for one cuz philosophy and politics are a bit different but it's the same kind of thing about you know this gap between appearance and I don't know the real stuff. And that was one thing I was I was thinking about the movie because it's like I would hate to land on the cynical that like everybody everybody is a hypocrite. Nobody follows through. Nobody really has the there's no real model put in contrast to Senica. There's nobody that really, you know, if these people are the people performing, there's nobody that's really the model of being kind of genuine. Um maybe the Roman soldier who's given Nero he was probably the most genuine character. He's he's sort of the character who knows who he is, doesn't flinch from it, but who is he? you know, he's someone who beats one of his soldiers to death because they're not physically fit enough and then uh, you know, has no qualms about giving the death sentence to Senica and, you know, dragging his body to a landfill at the end of the movie. So, it's not exactly a inspiring figure. Yeah. So, it's just kind of a Yeah. a cynical message, you know, bunch we got a bunch of hypocrites and the people that do know who they are are kind of crappy. Yeah. So, and it is and it's always harder, I think, to make a positive always I mean perhaps not always harder, but it does seem like these days uh it's harder to come up with a positive figure in these in these kinds of situations, these kinds of films. I mean, but if you I mean, I know Russell Crow and Gladiator, that's like an example of like I know they're like entirely different genres, but like this is like the I think about this in terms of you have the the person who's like postmodern, self-aware, making a commentary on something versus the person who's just it it almost comes off in a way like anti-intellectual, you know, if you're thinking too much about your philosophy or maybe anti-academic, I don't If you're thinking about your philosophy, you're writing about it, you're talking about it, there's more likely to be performance versus just the going, the acting, the doing. That's something stoicism talks about, something Epictitus talks about. But there's certainly a criticism of the the talking about here or questioning of the value of that. In Epictitus' words, I think Senica's this portrayal of Senica is vomiting up his stoicism all over everybody, you know, instead of instead of digesting it and turning into something valuable. Yeah, I think so. And in a way, I there's something I was trying to say earlier. I think that's it's almost easier to show someone who does that than show the less cynical, more gray version, which is probably closer to the accurate version of Senica, which is someone who does take stoicism seriously recognizes that he's someone, you know, who's at the hospital with his readers, with his listeners, has serious flaws, and uh is is in difficult situation and has serious political ambitions, has serious philosophical in the best sense uh ambitions and is trying to make sense of those. I feel like that that picture of Senica uh is harder portray and more interesting than you know purely you know seeing Senica as a saint versus seeing him as you know this Makavelian empty suit as it were. I think maybe that's a good idea to end on which is like you know if we're pursuing the truth of the matter you know art is art you can you can not saying this is not meant to be like a piece of uh this is not meant to be like an academic classical portrayal of of Senica but pursuing this the the truth of the matter it's probably not going to be the saint it's probably not going to be the cynical hypocrite both are caricatures or extremes it's probably going to be that more complicated version which puts you in a position where you can't write him off and you can't make him just the simple role model and that's kind of sucks. You got to you have to constantly wrestle with your opinion of him, but it's um opinion of Senica, but it's more realistic. Yeah, that's well put. I think that's a good spot to end. Awesome. Thanks, Gil. Awesome. And thanks for the recommendation from our listener. Oh, yeah. Thanks for uh sitting in the wreck. Um, if you have any other films, works of art y'all would like us to review, yeah, just shoot us a message Stowa stomeditation.com and uh happy to do something like this again. Thanks for listening to Stowa Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use, and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com and please get in touch with us at stoa at stoameditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
