---
title: "Seneca's Medea | Revenge, Violence, and Stoicism (Episode 176)"
slug: seneca-s-medea-revenge-violence-and-stoicism
episode_number: 176
youtube_id: ZH1id5oAK_c
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZH1id5oAK_c
upload_date: 2025-03-25
duration: 59:41
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stowa Conversations. My name is Caleb Anttoveros and I'm Michael Trombllay. And today we're going to be talking about something. We've we've never done anything like this before. We're going to be talking about one of Senica's plays. So the famous Stoic philosopher and statesman Senica also wrote plays and we'll be talking about one of those uh media plays. I should say we have had I had an episode with Dana Joya where he talked about one of Senica's plays, but this is the first episode between the two of us where we're going to be talking about Senica's fictional work. Y we did like our our Gladiator review back in the day. We did we've done some movie reviews 300. Now this is like uh Roman movies, you know, this is what they would go to watch. Um so uh yeah same kind of thing little exploration of the themes or the ideas and it it cuts both ways right so there's both a stoic themes in in the play and then as as you pointed out also written by Senica so also written by a stoic and um we can try to we'll try to psychologize a bit about his themes or what he was trying to get at with this story also just fun I've never read uh an ancient play before I come from my philosophy background but not a classics background. So um I mean I've I've read bits and pieces uh before especially when I was when I was doing ancient Greek um or we we would like you know read a bit of um a bit of plays but never one back to never completely in in English and um yeah it was enjoyable. I thought it was I thought it was interesting. I you know easier to read than Shakespeare. I'll say that made more made made more sense to me than the Shakespeare I've tried to read. Um yeah, any other context before we we uh jump into it? Yeah. Well, will we be talking about media? It's a little more gruesome, so be uh be prepared. Uh and then uh well, I just I suppose broadly speaking, I think fictional work and we maybe should have some longer discussions about this. I know we've just certainly gestured about this before, but stories, fiction, and such, I think, is perhaps an underrated way to get at philosophical themes. So, uh maybe that's something we don't do enough is think think about philosophy through stories, uh through myths. Uh and that's, uh I suppose we'll uh take a stab at doing that. see how Senica did that and see how we can respond to Senica's work as Stoics today. We'll also we'll also get into the plot in a moment. So, kind of start with an overview of the plot and then go into some of the the Stoic themes that come out of it. Um but it's an interesting story in particular because it's about and spoiler spoiler alert but it's it's about really extreme passion extreme rage and grief on the part of media and um you know the stoics have this view of nobody does wrong willingly. Um, Epictitus even explicitly refers to Medadia as an example of this, somebody who, you know, in in her grief and rage is driven to do these terrible things. Um, kill her own children to get back at her at her husband as as we'll see. Um, but also somebody who who thinks they're acting in a justified manner, who thinks this is the right way to act. And so I I it's it's uh, you know, there there might be this temptation. I mean, we'll get into as we get into the plot, but there might be this temptation to say, "Oh, a stoic is writing a better emotional person." They're probably just like judging this person or they're probably um making it like this very traditional kind of tragedy where the person gets angry and then the their life turns poorly because of their anger. And I I I think it's a bit more sympathetic than that. And I I didn't take media as kind of a caricature. It's it's it's not a black and white story in that sense. Um, and you kind of do feel and empathize for media even though it is um, it's ultimately a tragedy because, you know, she's not it's not a happy way to live for anybody. Yeah. Yeah. So, let's get into it. Let's get into some of the background. So, Senica was writing these plays probably around 50 AD or so. This is a retelling of a play by Uripides of the same name. Um, but of course the story precedes Uripides version. believe the first mention of Media is in Hessiad's theogy. So that was around the 9th century or so. So it's a kind of story that people fold again and again. That's really old. Yeah. Yeah. So probably in different versions. So I think you know people they when they talk about Senica they often see him as a little more black and white, over the top, more focused on this the sensational, the violent. You can almost think of him as a Quenta Tarantino almost where it's that focus on in in many of his plays, you know, almost the the lurid detailed the long speeches people give about their anger, their desire for vengeance culminating in so many of these plays and and violence and spectacle. So that's how uh Senica has generally seen Uripides. People have historically seen his version of Media as a little more nuanced. Whether or not that's correct, I think is another matter. But there's a little more nuance, more sympathy uh with Media perhaps. I think the chorus is perhaps more sympathetic towards Media than it is in Senica's version. But uh of course I think one could say a lot about this but I think that's just to give us a sense of very initial sense about how Senica is different is he has this you know ornate rhetorical style very skilled uh as many of these rhetorical flourishes and he sort of uses that in a way that if you like Senica's plays you think you know they're awesome spectacle with these cosmic themes. if you don't like his work as much, like you know, maybe they're just a little over the top or over wrought and so on. So, that's a little bit about his style, I suppose. But, uh, and and and some background on on the story, but you we should, uh, definitely get into the, uh, the actual the outline of this of this myth. Yeah. And I also I mean one thing other thing to add to that is I just always think it's cool because Uripides is writing if you're not familiar with his work um he's writing I was just just looking it up this won a prize the original media in um 430 BC. So Senica is writing almost 500 years later. And so it's it's almost like somebody retelling a Shakespeare like making a movie based on Romeo and Juliet today or something like that. Like it's a it's retelling of something hundreds year of years ago that that's been quite popular and kind of the myth the mythos or the culture of the time. Um in a little bit of a different spin on it. So plot overview and and Caleb jump in to to um direct or or add perspective as we go here. So, um the the real setup is you've got um Jason Jason just, you know, just a normal guy. Um he he he abandons his wife Media um marrying the daughter of the king of Corinth. Um so the it begins the play kind of begins with this betrayal. So media married to Jason. Um they have children together. And then Jason basically splits up with her, breaks her heart. Um, it's a bit more complicated though. So Jason, he claims, hey, he's been picked for this marriage and that he'd be killed if he refuses. So Medadia comes and talks to Jason is like, how could you do this? Um, you've kind of betrayed me. And he's like, I I he kind of tries to sell himself as a sympathetic person. He's like, "Look, the the king of Corinth asked me to marry his daughter, and if I said no, I'd be killed. So, I'm I'm really trying to like uh do what's best here. I'm trying to find a compromise." And I've also gone and negotiated Media for your survival. So, like, so that you wouldn't be executed and that you'll be exiled in instead of killed. So, Jason views himself not as a bad guy. He views himself really as a victim of circumstance, but Medadia's not super happy about it. Um, and then fearing revenge. So fearing the kind of anger or bitterness of media, the king exiles media. So that's that's why he would have killed her. Jason negotiates just for the exile. And and when she's leaving, she has this this really emotional conversation with Jason. He's basically like, you know, I still love you. Can will you come with me? Will you leave? And Jason refuses. And so Medadia is exiled and leaves Jason and her two children in Corinth. So that's kind of the the the start of the play. So just a really sad situation I would say. And then when Media leaves, she plots for revenge. So she plots for revenge. She's she's angry. She's she's not happy about this. Um and then her her her style of revenge, she does some magic. She curses a robe and she sends that robe to Jason's new wife to be. So Jason's new partner uh the you know the princess the princess of Corinth and when Jason's wife receives the robe it bursts into flames when she puts it on her dad the king he runs in to save her and he dies as well. Um so media acted out her plan for revenge and after this magic robe bursts into flames this fire spreads through the palace. the city is on fire. Um, she's really achieved her revenge. But that's not sufficient. Um, doesn't just end there. Media's also snuck back into the city. And then in this really dramatic scene on top of a on top of a building, Media snuck back into the city. She's kidnapped her two children and she's decided to kill her children to get back at Jason. I really want to make Jason suffer. It's not sufficient just for his new fiance to be killed. Uh I've got to do something that's really gonna hurt him. The thing that is really going to hurt him is the death of his children, even though they're her own children. Um and so she kills the first she kills the her first child. It's very sad. She's sad about it, but is like, "Well, I just have to do this." And then Jason kind of sees her and is like, "Whoa, what's going on? Um please don't do this. This is terrible. um you know, kill me instead. And Media is like, "No, I'm not going to kill you instead because my goal is to make you suffer, so I'm gonna" Then she then kills her second child in front of him. It's really sad. Um and then Jason's like, "Well, at least kill me so that I don't have to like live with this grief. Just like end it then. Get your revenge by murdering me." and she's just, this is like the climactic final scene of the play. Medadia is just like, "No, I I I won't." Um, and then she calls down a chariot from the gods and she rides away into heaven. And I've quoted the last line before, uh, last line lower, and we'll get to it, but Jason just exclaims something like, you know, there there are no gods. Like, this is this is just a terrible, terrible world. Um, and that's the end. That's it. It's the happy story. Yeah, that's the end. It's a tragedy. And Senica's tragedies often end, I think, the madness of Hercules, we've talked about before, with very little hope. You know, there are no gods. Almost a a questioning really of the stoic view. There's no no providence in this world. Uh, you know, some have said that this world mirrors more Senica's day-to-day and the imperial court, a world of, you know, backstabbing, treachery, violence where perhaps it was hard to see the providence of nature. Um, but yeah, that's that's what I'll summarize. That's what happens in the play. Some background. A lot of the, you know, people encountering this play would have known about Jason and Media as two mythic figures. they would have known about, you know, their story where, you know, before this aspect of their life. You see Jason sort of as an adventure. He's the born into a kingdom where he's wrongfully disinherited from his throne. And in order to get his throne back, he has to do a number of tasks. He has to bring back the golden fleece. Um, and he basically gets a team together of allstar heroes like like Hercules and you think of Jason and his Argonauts. He goes out and about and uh you know performs all these heroic deeds in order to get the fleece back. And part of that involves going to Kulkus where he meets the king Aites and his daughter Medadia and that's where Medadia passionately falls in love with him. Uh some have said she was cursed by Aphrodite to fall in love with him. Uh like so many of these stories, you know, the details are different in in every retelling, but she helps Jason trick I her father. She betrays her father in a way and helps him perform the tasks her father set before Jason. And then uh further helps Jason escape from her father's father tracking her down and tracking them down. In particular, she I think the most shocking thing she does is that she kills her own brother. And the story they're fleeing via ships and she cuts him up and throws his limbs into the sea so that his father needs must stop in order to piece back her brother and give him proper burial rights. Um, and then they're taken to this kingdom of uh, Aulkus. That's where Jason is owed the throne where Media also is involved in amount some amount of treachery uh, such that Jason and Media are then exiled again and that's where they flee to Corinth and that's where this story sort of takes off. And from Jason's point of view, it's in his interest to marry uh Creon's daughter and it's divorce media and that kicks off these the events of of the play. I mean, it's kind of interesting that Yeah. So, the Jason's a pretty important person. There's some historical background there. Um or at least mythological background. I mean it's the the anyway just interesting that this is these are these are two quite famous people then by that standard. Um and I guess this is like focusing on that last that very that very end of things. Um yeah it's just kind of sad. I don't really like I'm not usually big on tragedies. Um so kind of sad. Um, but I think it's it's it's almost I guess in my terms of reflections on the plot. I mean, when you called it kind of the Quinton Tarantino, I thought that was funny. Uh, because there is like a shockingness to it. Like it is a kind of a depravity of, you know, he's like, "Well, kill me." And she's just like, "No, like I I'm I won't because that's not how to maximize your suffering." Um, yeah. interested in getting to do you want to jump into some of the the themes that came out. I I mean I enjoyed reading it. I've never read a play before. I think it's worth reading. You could do it for anyone listening. You can do it in uh you know maybe maybe an an hour or two. Um it's not it's not terribly long and it's it's um it was well written definitely. Yeah, it's not not they're not long at all. They're certainly worth leafing through. But um yeah, let's jump into some of the the themes. Cool. So, I'm going to just pull out some themes and then pull out some quotes that I think um hit on those themes and specifically stoic themes. So, the first there's this idea that we're responsible for our character that Senica sneaks in here. So, there's a line, this is line 176, media is encouraged to calm her rage and she says, "Fortune can take away my wealth but not my spirit." And it's almost like I thought that was interesting because because typically when you say well like we're responsible for a character that's like empowering. Um but here she almost calls out like no you know it's a very like Epictitus line of you can you can cut off my head but only God can control my uh you know my faculty of choice. But here with the the dark twist of the revenge that's coming, it's almost taking the responsibility for the tragedy, I would say, of you know, fortune can take away my wealth, but not my spirit. I can keep my spirit and I'm going to use that spirit now to do this terrible thing. So, it's kind of maybe the opposite end of being responsible for your character. You're you you have this freedom to make good choices, but you also have the responsibility for the bad choices that are coming. Yeah, that's interesting. I think there's a there is also an interesting uh dichotomy about how both about how media and Jason think about fortune but I was wondering you know fortune for media she's impervious to whatever happens externally in a way because she's just possessed by passion and I think many many of the guard rails for other people that they might have towards their action just don't exist for her and she's happy to betray others, commit violence in order to fulfill her passion. So, in a sense, she she almost has a like a twisted version of the stoic inner citadel where it's like the having that passion being able to act on it is enough. I think it's it's it doesn't doesn't really work like that because of course the passion is ultimately driven by facts in the external world. the fact that she's being divorced. But there's a way in which if you once you fully are in the grip of passions then the ex even if the external world is what help kick things off and how you responded to the external world. Of course for the stoics uh what the external world actually is becomes irrelevant to you and you can just act from from that passion from that anger uh and with you know an impervious spirit which if it was a good emotion it would be a an amazing thing but if it's a delusional belief that's grounding that passion then of course it's a terrible terrible thing. Yeah. So the argu the the idea is something like we we respond we develop passions because of facts about the world or at least our views of those facts. You know I've been harmed I'm being divorced. I'm being abandoned by my family. But then once you're in that rage you know the other facts start you know this is actually my child. My child probably doesn't deserve this. Uh, I have ways of getting back at Jason that doesn't involve harming innocent people. Even these kind of facts, like even if you want to keep a aspect of your anger, you you you start being because you're in the grip of the passion, as you were saying, you're not receptive to facts anymore. Even if they cut it, even if they kicked it off, it kind of just carries you along. Right. Right. Is that Yeah, I think so. Oh, and I suppose you if you want to tie that to some other Saka Saka's philosophy, you know, he has that analogy to emotions when they really take grip. They're closer to running and once they get difficult, you know, once you have hit speed, it's going to be harder and harder to slow down. It can take on a life of its own almost. Yeah. Well, that's something that I wanted to call out. Another one too is that I see rage in this play represented in a way that's also kind of longterm. Like one way to do a a play about rage, you know, media walks in and Jason's in bed with another woman and there's this crime of passion, you know, and that's that's that really that's one way to do it is like you're blinded, you're not thinking, you're acting. But this is, you know, she leaves, she concocts the plan, she executes the plan, she doesn't really feel anything like she doesn't feel doubt. Um, maybe there's maybe I, you know, I've only read it once. Maybe there is some doubt when killing her children. I I I I seem to remember it more as just like, uh, this is unfortunate that this is what has to be done, but it is what has to be done. Um, and so there there I don't know if cold is the right term for it. I don't know if you describe media as cold, but it's definitely like long-term. It's definitely calculating. Um, I have this quote here. Um, this is line 382. This is a nurse who had a conversation with Medadia. And the nurse says, "Where the weight of her wrath inclines, where it aims its threats, hangs still in doubt. She threatens, seized with rage, complains, groans aloud. Where will this wave break itself? Madness overflows its bounds. No simple or halfway crime does she ponder in her heart. She will outdo herself. Um, and I there there's something there about it's both the madness is overflowing its bounds, but she's also pondering like she's also constructing a plan. And that's we don't we don't normally think of angry people as constructing. Maybe maybe you do, but like rage and plans. I don't know that I thought that was I thought there was something interesting there. Do do you get what I'm getting at? It's like it's very hot, but also over a long term period. Yeah, I think so. I think so. She um Yeah, as you say, it's not a crime of a single moment. And I think I think this gets to the fact that you know the Senica you might think about why why are the stoics focusing on or why would a stoic ever write a play like this? many reasons, but one might be just to explore and get a better sense or to better portray vices like anger and do perhaps get some get some approach some insight by taking an extreme version of it. And I see media of course is someone who is you know anger is sort of ingrained into her character and it's a kind of desire to see others suffer obviously Jason here but you know you have the sense from her interactions with the nurse that this is not something people were surprised by. You know it wasn't like oh my goodness. How is this how could this you know some some how some characters might break in terms of anger but for media this is not out of the script as it were that she would be furious uh and then dangerous feeling wronged. So I think that gets to that point about seeing anger not as a momentary flash but as something that at its worst wrath it's can become a part of one's character and live with you through time shaping your life not just daytoday but you know through years at its worst I suppose you know we read different in other fictional accounts you you know, read about angry characters and it's just like that's just an angry at a certain point someone just becomes an angry person, you know, or perhaps you've met someone like that in your life where you just have a sense of their it's not a moment of frustration they're uh expressing but something deep a deep kind of anger within them that Sonic has a perhaps capturing here with media as well. Yeah, that's a great point. Maybe something that I'm I don't think I'm a very angry person. Like and I say that with all I think I have issues like anybody else and uh you know vices but I I anger is not doesn't strike me as one of them and I I but I do get frustrated or you do as you said get kind of angry in the moment and this is maybe pointing to that that viciousness where that anger um really solidifies or calluses as Epictitus might put it as a metaphor. I also thought I mean we're going to just talk a lot about media's anger or the nature of her anger and what Senica is trying to say about it as a stoic who writes on anger. Um I thought this was this interesting point there was this interesting passage or this idea that you know when we are enraged or when we become angry people we take on this distorted view of the world. This kind of connects with what we're saying. It's not just a again because it's connected to how we think about the world. It's not just oh you're an angry person. And it's like, well, you think about the world in a distorted way. And um when Media's talking to the nurse, she's describing the injustices she's experienced by her husband marrying another woman. And she says, quote, "Can it be that unavvenged I should endure this royal wedding? Shall this day go idly by so anxiously besought, so anxiously bestowed?" And these are rhetorical questions. And she's basically being like, "Could I go through this wedding without getting revenge? Can I like go through this day and not do anything?" And these are rhetorical questions that her answer is like, "Obviously not. Obviously I have to do something." But I just thought there was kind of an irony there because the stoic is the stoic would say obviously yes. You know, obviously you can go through the wedding and do nothing. Yes, you can uh endure this day. Um, you know, they may even say because the Stoke would go so far as to say because you haven't been harmed, but it's just like e even the even the person with the enraged character is still developed. Even Media has this way of thinking out the world. It's just what the answers to these questions seem obvious to her. They're just wrong. It's like, no, I I can't. I think about this, you know, you think about this with somebody, I don't know, sometimes you see this in kind of like um with guys, it's like, you know, I've been insulted. Can I just like put up with that without fighting that person or without, you know, uh yeah, like going to blows with them? Um and the answer is like yes, you I mean you can that's always an option. It's always the second handle you can pick things up by. Um, and so I thought that was like she obviously doesn't see it that way, but reading it as a stoic. There's just that there's just a different way to answer those questions. Yeah. And the point of connecting anger to madness is right. I think Senica does a good job especially towards the end where media's siloquiz sort of reach a point where it's clear the anger she almost intoxicated in an intoxicated state uh and taking glee from her her wickedness as it were. Um one thing you did mention is uh whether she expresses doubt there is one moment this is around line um 9:25 or so towards the very end I think this is the fifth act where she's talking about her rage you know she has a little bit of a a long a long speech on her madness what she's planning to do to kill her children. And then she stops and says, "Awful. It hits my heart. My body turns to ice. My chest is heaving. Anger has departed. The wife in me is gone. I am all mother again. Is this me? Could I spill my own children's blood? Flesh of flesh. No. No. What terrible madness." And there's a brief pause where, you know, the anger is gone. She says, "Why am I led in two directions? Now by anger, now by love, my double inclination tears me apart. As when the wild winds make their brutal wars, and on both sides the seas lift up discordant waves, and the unstable water boils, even so my heart tosses and churns. Love is chased out by rage and rage by love. Resentment yield to love. And she almost does give way to love until, you know, she remembers that she will lose her children regardless. And there's a sense of hatred at Jason for taking the joy of her children where she cannot no longer have her children now that she's in exile. She says, "But I must go in exile any minute. They will be ripped from my arms, weeping and wailing. Let their father lose their kisses. Their mother has already lost them again." My anger grows, my hatred boils. And that her doubt is gone at that point. and she uh continues to Yeah, that's sad. Go on with her uh with her madness as it were. Um I mean you got that original that kind of like self-destructive nature of like if I can't have you, nobody can. Um which we still see today. Um but then there's also I think from a stoic view there's that idea of role ethics. I like that line of like what is it? I'm mother, no longer wife or I I'm just you you just mentioned it. You know, you're you're you're viewing your betrayal through the lens of wife and you're getting revenge through the lens of wife when obviously what you're doing is portraying the role of mother. Absolutely. Uh something interesting there. Yeah, I think that's right. And that yeah obviously what I would say takes precedence. Of course there are other roles. One is violating by killing one's own children. But uh you know I suppose her twisted reasoning is I've lost this role mother regardless. So Jason must lose the role of father. Yeah I guess so. I mean I guess that is everybody thinks they're doing right. Right. So, um, one one could argue that it would be better to fulfill your role of mother to not stab your children, but I guess she's doing her best. Um, yeah, it's a twisted reasoning. I I sort of see Medadia as really an evil character who's just sort of taken up by passion and Senica sort of showing you this is what it looks like if you're completely you know in the grips of madness or or nearly completely you know she perhaps almost breaks free but and um and I think it would have been important for audiences to sort of understand her history as someone who you know betrays her for the sake of Jason kills her brother and then why does she kill her brother? When you were explaining that why does she kill her brother? What the chopping up and throwing? I was kind of taken back by that part. What was the what was the function of that? Yeah, the logic is that of that is that I is chasing down Jason and Medadia her father is chasing them down after they flee Colcast. Oh yeah. Yeah. Okay. So he has and that puts them off the tracks. Yeah. Puts them off their tracks. But the brother was like on her team like he was just Yeah, the brother came out. Yeah, he was just chilling and then Yeah, that's terrible. Okay, so she has one to do terrible things for the sake of I guess the people she loves and it has kind of it can be directed externally or it can be directed at you. Um, one thing that I wanted to this is this connects to this idea of madness. Anger is madness. There's some lines here that and I would say that Medadia's revenge is not about achieving justice but about appeasing the passion or almost satisfying the madness the way Senica writes it. So when when Jason discovers her at the end of the play after she's killed their first son but not the second um Jason says this to her and they have a conversation and Jason goes by all the gods by our flight together by our marriage couch to which I have not been faithless in he hasn't know consummated this new relationship yet spare the boy if there is any guilt it is mine I give myself up to death destroy my guilty head and media says here. Uh, where you do forbid it, where it will grieve you, will I plunge the sword. Go now, hotty man, take the maids for wives, abandoned mothers. And then Jason says, "One is enough. One is enough for punishment." Media says, "If this hand could be satisfied with the death of one, it would have sought no death at all. Though I slay two, still is the count too small to appease my grief." Yeah, I think there's something interesting there. It's not like a calculus. It's like um I've got to just maximize pain. Not because you deserve it. Um yeah, almost because it's unjust, right? I almost like because you forbid it. Because your argument to kill you instead makes sense, I'm going to do it anyway. Yeah. So I think it's a it's a it's a mix like you're trying to satisfy the anger but it's something that cannot be satisfied. Satisfied. Yeah. Right. It's just a like the inverse of a hydic treadmill. Yeah. The suffer the suffer treadmill or the um really a sadistic treadmill. Yeah. Totally. And then one other one other thing that I wanted to call out that Senica says about anger is he he hits on here that it can feel righteous that it can feel good. Yeah, righteous brings in those ideas of justice but at least that it can feel good. It can feel pleasurable when you're in the to do bad things when you're in the grips of this madness or this passion. So um the nurse warns Media. She says to media round line 425, "Win back thy woe troubled heart, my mistress, calm thy soul." Medadia says, "The only calm for me if with me I see the universe overwhelmed in ruins. With me, let all things pass away. It is sweet to drag others down when thou art perishing." Um, so there's almost this this there's this appeal Senica is making to the pleasure of it or the sweetness at least of getting that revenge. Yeah, absolutely. I think it's the intoxicating effect of of anger Senica's pointing at and the the spectacle of this play, you know, Media is scary. She's a horrifying figure. And perhaps, you know, Senica's gesturing at the the scary element in anger itself, right? Even a little bit of anger, it's the same kind of thing that that drives media mad. And uh obviously this is an extreme example but I think all of us have have cases where we've been angry and later ashamed at what we've done and sort of the grips of anger as it were because in the moment you know it feels just it feels right and this uh those feelings you know Senica might be pointing us towards resisting you know resisting righteous anger seeing it instead as you know the scary force divorce, one of the worst of the passions. Do you think that do you think that's what's going on here? Like do you think this is a simple case study? Like is that what you think Senica is doing here? This is a case study of just a mad person and that is just like instructive as a stoic tool of like, hey, don't be like this or there any other kind of I think you pick up. Well, I think that's one way to read it and certainly the most obvious way to read it. Oh, another thing we touched on is Epictitus thinking about mentioning media and how she's doing the best by her lights. We can get perhaps a little bit deeper into some of those stoic ideas of emotion. I think there are also questions around Jason. So like you know Jason is in a sense a more complicated character than media where I see media almost you know purely possessed by passion and there's the question you know like what's up with Jason? Why is he divorcing her? Why do you choose to exile her? I don't know what what do you what you know what are your impressions about about him as a character? H I mean maybe that's the tragedy like one way to so one thing to do is like maybe if you view it through like a male centric lens um I don't know like it's interesting basically because it's interesting to have this complex female character as a lead but then you're like I think you know well is this was is this is this an attempt to be not progressive because they wouldn't have thought of things that way but were they were they focusing on this or is media maybe like this force of nature that then the male character is dealing with which is Jason. And so is there a lesson about Jason's behavior? I guess is what is maybe what you're asking which might be well he's kind of a bad person and he kind of gets what's coming to him when he's a bad person and and you know he's not um like Epictitus gives that example of like the tyrant comes asking for your head and you say well take my head right and instead Jason's like well don't take my head uh you know yeah I'll I'll marry your daughter it's all good and uh I'll negotiate a good position for my wife because I feel guilty about things. And it's like I is is this kind of a warning around playing the I don't know the guy who justifies himself as being who who who doesn't make the hard choices but then yeah isn't able to look that in the face and just kind of doesn't Yeah. Jason just doesn't doesn't live up to the stoic goal of virtue. Um even though he's a more sympathetic character than Med. not killing his children and then maybe this is the punishment that comes with that. I don't know that might be a bit harsh. Yeah, I think um well I don't think you know I don't I don't it is in a sense a tragedy. So I don't know if you have the idea that Jason deserves what's coming to him. At the same time he's not completely innocent, right? he has uh and I think what what you said about his almost refusal to take make hard choices points at perhaps his flaw. There is this uh there's this dialogue between media and Jason which uh is instructive where Jason asks what crime in the end can you charge me with? Media said, "All I have done." Jason said, "Ah, that was all I needed. That your crimes would be treated as my fault." Media responds, "They are yours. Yours if I gain from a crime, you did it." Jason says, "A life of which one feels ashamed is an unwelcome gift." Uh, skipping a few lines of course, but essentially saying, "Look, sort of really changing the subject." He says, "The things you did for me are things I feel ashamed of now." Medi responds, "One who feels ashamed of life need not cling to it." And then Jason says, "I disagree. You need to tame your heart, too quick to anger, make peace with our sons." Where Media's argument there is, look, you've accepted the results of me betraying my father, betraying my brother, uh, tricking Paleas, and these, you know, these crimes are in a sense yours. And then Jason says,"Well, I'm ashamed of those crimes." And Medadia makes this the stoic point really, which is like if you're ashamed of your life so deeply, you need not cling to it. Right? You see Jason almost says he's not he hasn't decided whether he's going to hold the chamber pot or not. Right? Going to back to Epictitus where Epictitus says, you know, you make the choice and then you stick with it. and he's trying to benefit from Media's vices while perhaps avoiding the uh all the you know the costs that come with what she's done and also in the fact that he negotiated exile right perhaps he should have not divorced her at all but he knows media you know why did he let her live if you know that if and if he was truly a ashamed by her crimes and such Yeah, why not just have him killed? So, go full go full virtuous or full vicious, right? Like the fully vicious guy is just, oh great, here's my chance out. Let's have media executed. And then the full virtuous is like, well, no, I'm not going to divorce my wife, uh, even if there's consequences. And he he picks this kind of middle ground where, you know, yeah, I'm going to take Media's help, but I'm not going to stand by her when push comes to shove. I'm going to be kind of embarrassed and ashamed and guilty. Yeah, it is interesting now looking at the um now that you bring in that earlier context of you know is there a way of him looking at this as his out you know I I I was putting weight maybe on that like oh I would be killed or I'd be dangerous but if media is such a villain you know is he seeing this as his opportunity to position climb his opportunity to get out of a passionate but tumultuous relationship with somebody who you know um maybe kind of scares him and he kind of picks this I guess middle road that isn't to the benefit of anybody certainly not to the benefit of his kids let's say yeah certainly not and I one one other point and I I mentioned that they have different views of fortune the first line from Jason are here let me find them and they're related to this first lines from Jason are my luck is always bad and my and fate is always cruel just as bad to me in kite ness or an anger. How often gods find for us anecdotes worse than the threatened pain. So he sort of enters in this woe is me type state which you can see is sort of perhaps that attitude that might take you to more um to cowardice really I suppose or failing to make those hard decisions where you think you know I've been pushed these way pushed around by by fortune my my luck is awful uh instead of media who has an opposite view of fortune fortune doesn't matter. I'm going to exert my wrath, exercise my wrath on the world. You know, Jason hasn't responded to fortune properly. Still maybe trying to sneak through with getting all getting all the benefits, paying none of the costs or at least, you know, trying to do that in a way that's that's not realistic. Yeah, I like that. I mean, I like this reading. It makes it less about I mean, it can be both at the same time, but it makes it a bit less about media and her psychology and a bit more about um as you said, maybe this is not as a tragedy. It's not Jason getting what he deserves, but he's being somewhat complicit in it. Um h it also makes I mean you were also giving the political reading at the start of Senica is aware of of you know the life in the court the betrayals and this is much more of kind of a cynical I maybe not cynical but um that reading where you with the focus on Jason points more I think to the political view of of well you know you can't h you can't uh try to have your cake and eat it too, right? like you can't you can't employ somebody to I don't know assassinate your enemies or bribe um but not as you said have the good fortunes but not pay the costs which are kind of the things that um that Jason's doing which is like using media when it's expedient or beneficial to him and then kind of discarding her and neither neither doing so acknowledging like yeah I'm a bad guy and I'm going to kill my wife when it's been my interests nor standing by her just kind of um hm that's yeah I I like that I like that reading yeah that's interesting I think it's James Rom as well in his biography of Senica who says another play of Senica uh is on the story of Thestes where Thestes sort of starts almost in an idyllic type scenario with his children and then is called back to meet his brother something he knows is not a good idea that and take his children with him and of course is another tragedy that ends ends in death. uh but he's called back perhaps by political ambition and of such and I think it's Rom who asks you know does this these sorts of notes do they echo in Senica's life you know something he's wrestling with this desire to be you know an ambitious successful Roman statesman with the desire to almost accept you know his exile and early life and you know be the philosopher instead of trying to climb back into Roman power which he eventually does and and uh gets the benefits for doing so and then pays the price for doing so as well. So that's um I think another sort of political angle on this uh angle that relates to Senica's own life. Yeah, that it's kind of sad. Sad in a different way. Um maybe because and maybe we all can do that but I can kind of empathize with that with the trying to the stoic view. Yeah. I mean, I'm happy to call this the Chamber Pot reading of either like do the bad thing and accept the consequences or do the good thing and accept the consequences, but you know, don't be kind of woe is me because I'm holding the chamber pot or because I'm not like don't don't don't pick one and complain, which is kind of Jason where where Jason is and as you said resonates with Senica's life as well, where he's given these these moments of choice. um between yeah maybe a political and a philosophical life and has to commit. Yeah, I think so. And I think I've been reading the prince lately. So, uh Prince is obviously inspired by Makave Valley, but sometimes the uh failing to do the bad thing is sometime and not not doing the virtuous thing but trying to strike this middle way is often worse than just doing the bad thing. Yeah. Yeah. Where, you know, often better to be a decisive, cruel prince than a weak one who, you know, slowly destroys their city or lets lets, you know, the elements he should have crushed uh grow and foster until uh worse things happen. You know, in this story, Midi ends up setting fire to the city, killing people. you know, people end up dead who would have been alive if they Jason had just done the taken the harsher step. So that's uh it's not endorsing that step, but uh perhaps it is at least saying relative to what Jason tried to do, it does seem like it would have been a better choice. Yeah. One thing I wanted to hit on um as as we wrap up, I I think that distinction is a really good one. Um, I just want to for those that haven't read it yet, read out the the ending because for me it is like the most hardcore ending of maybe anything ever that I've engaged with. It's just just brutal. Um, so um yeah, I I'll I'll read the passage and then maybe get your reaction, Caleb. Um, so this is the very these are the very last lines of the play. Um, this is when Medadia's about to kill the second child and Jason's begging her to kill him instead. And Jason says, "Oh, heartless one, slay me." Um, and media says, "Um, thou bits me pity." And then she kills her second child in front of him. Tis well, T is done. I had no more atonement to offer thee, O grief. Lift thy tear swollen eyes hither, ungrateful Jason. Dost recognize thy wife. It is thus I am want want to flee. This is an old translation but um now now I want to flee a way through the air has opened for me. Two serpents offer thy scaly necks bending to the yoke. Now father take back thy sons. She throws the bodies down to him. I through the air on my winged chair shall ride. She mounts the car and is born away. So she she gets carried away in a chariot of the gods. Jason calling after her, "Go on through the lofty spaces of heaven and bear witness where thou thou rides that there are no gods." Um just brutal. That's that's the that's the end of the play. And she's like literally getting carried away in a chariot to heaven by literal gods. And Jason's like, "Yeah, go tell the gods that there are no gods." which I think is just such a banger of a line. And maybe I should check if Uripides says the same thing. But I I just I I love that idea of like you're literally looking at a god and you're like, "No, gods don't exist." Because that's how messed up this world is. This world, whatever you are, I guess you're not what we call gods. Um you know, whoever is carrying media away. [Music] Um yeah, just Yeah, absolutely. It's a roof. Yeah. Yeah. It's a crushing play really. And this is this is I think one part that's hard to square with senica stoisism. This sort of hopelessness. You could say sort of, you know, this is a picture of a positive moral tale about, you know, then showing you not positive not the right not the right word here, but it's an instructive moral tale about, you know, the damage of wrath, wages of cowardice perhaps, but the ending is is really is empty in a way that must be uh doesn't doesn't I think doesn't obviously sit well with traditional all stoicism. Certainly, and maybe it's not stoic, right? Maybe Senica's flexing his artist. I'm sure people have thought more about this that know more about Senica's art than me. Maybe he's just being an artist. He's flexing the kind of ambiguity. He's exploring a story where stoicism isn't true. Um, where there is no providence. Um, and maybe that's not instructive. It's just um, yeah, just sad. I think so. You can certainly see why uh someone experiencing these things would would say there are no gods and that's I suppose the common challenge to the stoic view you know if you think there's providence why are there so many terrible horrific things in the world and this this voice to that like if we had to shove this into a stoic definition would be something like well it was your fault Jason or um you know you perceive this to be a harm when it's Not really, but it's kind of like a case study. Like that's the this is like the kind of thing that non- stoics do. And you're like, well, externals are indifferent. It's like, yeah, what if I killed both of your children in front of you and then threw them in like threw them before you? Would you say nothing bad has happened? Would you do that stoic? It's kind of like one of those like uh thought experiment counter examples. Um and yeah. [Music] Um, who I don't know what's providential about it. I don't think it's a I don't think this is a providential universe unless we want to like really blame Jason in a way. I mean, clearly guys, it's a tragedy. He didn't deserve it. So, I mean, Senica is probably just messing around, it seems to me, with testing the limits. He's always been like the most eclectic of the famous Stoics, the one most I mean, kind of testing the limits of the thinking here. It is also just a fictional example, right? like he could use factual examples if he wanted of terrible situations where people's kids die. It is a fictional example that he's kind of that he's playing around with. Yeah. And he does mention uh historical examples of there's a letter of Stilpo who Demetrius you know sacks the city and kills his children wife and Senica praises Stilpo's sort of stoic resolve. I think Stilpo says you took nothing of mine. and you took nothing from me in some translations, which is uh sort of the stoic view of the inner citadel. Yeah. Yeah. But that's not what you get here. And that's a I think it's it's a challenge of the stoic view really perhaps, you know, what's what's really possible if you're not if you're not at this stage or if you're not someone like Still Poe yet. Yeah. And anything else you wanted to add on on the on the play? Yeah. Let me see. Yeah, I don't think I don't think so. I think it's of course worth reading Senica's plays. Perhaps we should do another one. They are different. I think they are different from his philosophy and perhaps there that's a or a promising uh way to start thinking about them. So they're they're not not not standard stoicism. you can get stoic themes from them. But that's that's only one way to interact with with the uh the plays themselves, which of course are retellings of these stories for which there are, you know, hundreds of different versions, variations upon variations. So perhaps as a note to end on is that something I love about these uh Greek Roman myths and such is that you can always take a slightly different path, tweak a detail here or there and get something new from the story. Yeah, I'm surprised they didn't they don't teach us about media when we're younger. It's all this Disney's Hercules, but where is Disney's media? That's what we really I can see why now. This is like this gets a lot sadder. Although I'm sure Hercules is probably pretty sad too in the original version. Um, yeah. Know I think you hit I think you hit the nail on your head the headwards which is like there's going to be stoic themes in any drama or any sort of story because stoicism is about living. Um, so any example of life what we can talk about through a stoic lens. But these are not kind of this is not to me a simple stoic parable or it is not to me just a method of teaching lessons about stoicism. Um Senica does seem to be offering something artistic here in that it's like it's not just a not just a well you know if you if you get really angry bad things are going to happen. um even though we can read it that way, it is it is a um yeah, maybe a a a retelling of this Greek myth um in a way that we can pull, as you said, the stoic lessons from, but not not the only thing you can do with it. An interesting play. Yeah, absolutely. It stands alone. I think that's a Yeah, that's put it. Awesome. Cool. Thanks, Phil. Thanks, Michael. Thanks for listening to Stowa Conversations. Please give us a rating on Apple Podcasts or Spotify and share it with a friend. If you want to dive deeper still, search Stowa in the App Store or Play Store for a complete app with routines, meditations, and lessons designed to help people become more stoic. And I'd also like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. You can find more of his work at ancientlar.com. And finally, please get in touch with us. Send a message to stoa@ stoameditation.com if you ever have any feedback, questions, or recommendations. Until next time.
