---
title: "Should Stoics Use AI (Episode 200)"
slug: should-stoics-use-ai
episode_number: 200
youtube_id: 0Oo4NaU5Yq4
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Oo4NaU5Yq4
upload_date: 2025-09-09
duration: 50:02
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Michael Trombllay >> and I'm Caleb Montiveros. >> And today we are asking the question, should Stoics use AI? Um framing for this episode, general topic or general question, but one that is is interesting. You know, as AI is becoming a big part of our bigger part of our lives, there are some people that are very pro, some people that are very against. And so looking at that through the lens of stoicism, you know, is it is it stoic to use AI? Is it unto Stoic? Is it in some ways harmful to the pursuit of an ethical virtuous life? Or, you know, is it just an indifferent? It just comes down to how you use it. These are the questions we'll be exploring today. And this is not the only time, we'll get into this shortly. This is not the only time that you know philosophers or stoics have written about advances in technology kind of paradigm shifts um and also the way people relate to you know books versus discourse and and dialogue versus lectures and other kinds of mediums of exchanging information. So, we're kind of situating, at least in in my notes, situating that in a in an ancient context of debate about the best way to engage with these new mediums as they come out if you were a philosopher, if you're pursuing wisdom. So, that's the framing for today. I think it' be an interesting discussion because I'm personally pretty pro- AAI in some instances and then I think I'm I'm like most other people where it almost seems wrong or makes me uncomfortable to offload some aspects of my life to AI. It seems I don't know impersonal or something like this. Um but that's so that that's why I wanted to talk about this today. Anything you wanted to say Kayla by way of introduction? Yeah, we're going to talk about AI as it exists today. I think the focus will be on specifically the tools that that people have developed that's starting to enter our workplaces, personal lives, tools like chat, GPT, Claude, Gemini, what have you. And uh as you say, philosophers have thought about technology. I think the Stoics have some useful they've given us useful material to reflect on our use of uh AI because I certainly think it's it's a kind of thing where on one hand people can get as a society just sort of go forward naturally follow economic logic as it were and just introduce these sorts of tools without reflection perhaps for economic reasons perhaps for social reasons whether it's positive hype or negative hysteria area, but uh I think the Stoics help us step back a little bit and think about the nature of these tools and how they can be beneficial or harmful. So, we'll do our best to touch on a few points here and there and talk also about how we personally use these tools because I believe both of us do use AI tools fairly regularly. So, >> well, actually in my we'll get into it, but in my work, we're really pushing the use and adoption of AI. I work as a consultant and it's I think almost seen as like an existential imperative that we develop this capability to use AI which is this which brings up these really interesting questions right when you're paying people for expertise what are you paying for are you paying for the idea generation are you paying for the capacity to um you know look at what something like chat GBT outputs and say well this part makes sense this part doesn't um I'm kind of curate the output of AI. Um is is there something >> yeah is there something less expert in curation than in generation? These kind of interesting questions um that clients are wrestling with when they're when they're um deciding whether or not to allow the use of AI and from you know services and and products. Um cool. So I'll jump into it with the first idea. Um so when when you know should Stokes use AI big question. The first way I want to frame this is that ancient philosophy was was all has always been concerned about things that provide the conceit of learning at the expense of learning. What that means is like they provide the appearance of having learned something even though you haven't learned it. And I think that's a real risk if you if you think about that from the Socratic context. Socrates has this idea of at least I know that I know nothing. And this is the idea that's like what's more dangerous than ignorance is the absence of of the knowledge of your own ignorance kind of overconfidence. And so I I would say the kind of first counterpoint just should sto use AI or the first counter argument is that well we need to be very careful that AI isn't making us overconfident isn't make making us into the kind of people that think we know things we don't know or think we understand things we don't understand. Um and I I'll do this from um I'll take a passage from Plato's Fedris which is a dialogue that that um this passage actually concerns the invention of writing or the invention of the written word and so uh it's kind of an interesting because you know we don't think of writing as being a bad thing for learning but you know Plato at least here argues against it and so some to in in in this passage a little bit of context somebody's presenting the written word as this amazing in invention to a king. Um, and then the king kind of pushes back against it and says, "Well, maybe this isn't as good a thing as you propose it to be." And so the passage goes, "Here, O king, is a branch of learning that will make the people of Egypt wiser and improve their memories. My discovery provides a recipe for memory and wisdom." This is the the the written word. But the king answered and said,"Oh man full of arts, to one it is given to create the thing of art, to another to judge what measure of harm and of profit they have for those that shall employ them." And so it is that you, by reasons of your tender regard for the writing, that it is your offspring, have declared the very opposite of its true effect. If men learn this, it will implant forgetfulness in their souls. They will cease to exercise memory because they rely on that which is written. Calling things to remembrance no longer from within themselves but by means of external marks. What you have discovered is not a recipe for memory but for reminder. And it is no true wisdom that you offer your disciples but only its semblance. For by telling them of many things without teaching them, you'll make them seem to know much while for the most part they know nothing. And as men filled not with wisdom but with the conceit of wisdom, they will be a burden to their fellows. So lots of things to get in into there. One, I love the way they open. So first, there's just that irony of like, well, written word is great, but there was this kind of concern about it. Um, at least at least Plato's presenting here. And you could even see that as as kind of a pro AI argument because you could say, well, Plato is obviously so wrong about it. But but I I don't think that's charitable. I think he he's he's raising a legitimate concern. Um and and one part here also they say, you know, it's one job to create the art, it's another to judge if it's actually good or not. And that was that for me is is your economic point, Caleb, of people that are making AI are just going to push ahead. They're going to create the new models. They're going to they're going to take this kind of expansionist perspective, but they're not the philosophers. They're not people thinking about, you know, is this actually good for people? And the concern that Plato provides here is this distinction between reminder and recollection. Um memory which is I' I've internalize something. I understand something. I'm retrieving it versus I guess reminder here which is oh this has been written down for me so I can kind of call it call it up when I need to even though I don't really understand it. It's not really a part of who I am. And then that last point at the end where you know there's people that are filled with the conceit of wisdom not wisdom and they become a burden to their fellows. And so that's that overestimation point I made at the start where people think they know things that they don't actually know and there's there's a risk there. So what do what do you think about that? Yeah, I think that's that's well put. I suppose one take away from that passage is the practical one which is that by externalizing learning really you're not you're robbing yourself of an opportunity to learn yourself and not internally building up a skill. And some sometimes that's that's all right but in other cases I think that can really hamper. So I I think a concrete example of this is use AI a lot in programming and it is quite good at certain tasks. But some things I've noticed with junior developers is that because they haven't developed as good of an intuition about code generally sometimes they can push out a lot of stuff that isn't very good and it might not be obvious to them that it's very good that's given to them from an AI and in a way I think there some sometimes there's a risk that by not sitting down and trying to solve these problems that come up while programming, not getting there, not just diving into the code itself, trying to understand what's really going on, but instead, you know, constantly asking chat GBT, can you fix this bug? Can you fix this bug? What about this one that just came up? You're robbing yourself of a deeper understanding of how the code actually works. So, I think that's how you that's certainly a con practically speaking, but perhaps Plato's getting at even something deeper here, you know. What do you think about that? >> I think that's exactly right. I think of all the at least in the circles I am in there's all this education concern about students are basically going to university and they're using chat GBT to get a bunch of B's. Uh I don't even I haven't been to university in a while but I don't even know how you would I remember grading undergraduate essays and they are not discernable from the output of of the a B or a C essay is not discernible from the quality that um these large language models are capable of producing now. are probably better, more coherent than some of the of the more challenging essays I've graded. >> More challenging >> challenging to par. You you always think you always people think like I'm not happy to have a bad essay. It's like I want this to be a good essay. I want to say good job and give you a good grade and move on. Um and so yeah, you you're you're pointing to this kind of opportunity cost where I think there's the two points. is the opportunity cost which is your you had an opportunity to learn and you you just you didn't do it. I think of the difference of like you know if you're asking chatbt hey how do I cook this or how do I do this thing every single time instead of actually like internalizing it and and and gaining that knowledge you know use the coding example but then the other thing is that kind of conceit that which is the deeper point I think Plato's making which is the risk of thinking you know so the junior developer that thinks they know how to code because they produce something you know halfdeent or passable with the support of chatbt for one of these models that is more dangerous than the person who's like, I have no idea what I'm doing. That's why I'm I'm almost like um no idea what I'm doing, but at least I I'm using this as a tool, but I I don't think I can do this. I just I know that I need the tool. Um and so I think I think that's a danger. And and so when when Plato signed with the written word, it was this it was like, yeah, you can recite the line, but are you reciting the line because you've internalized it or because you looked at your book in your hand? And if you think those are the same thing, that's the real danger. So yeah, that's that that for me is the deeper point. And so if if we come back to a stoic to avoid this, I think writing is a really good tool to avoid this. I think things that require kind of internalization and knowledge there talking about things with friends. There's all these ways that you can build this that don't require it. Um, I think I see a lot people kind of typing things into chat GBT and thinking, "Oh, I've gotten a good answer or I know what the Stoics think because this answer's come up." But that like the coding example, they don't have the expertise to understand that this was like a misinterpretation or um something along these lines. But I think also just in your domains, if you're if you're stoic, you're pursuing excellence and mastery in your roles. And there there's a risk of not doing that if you, you know, outsource too much of your thinking or mastery to to one of these pieces of technology. >> Mhm. Yeah. I talked about this some with Andrew Perlott in the episode 197, especially around uh memory perhaps and some of the risks of downplaying the importance of memory. I think that's just that's just I mean that's what's Plato's concerned about with writing is that by having a tool you can refer to in case you've forgotten something you're not going to be able to remember it when that tool isn't present and so it's not perhaps a part of your your character as it were or not a part of you in the way that knowledge is uh is perhaps a more classical way to put it. >> Mhm. >> And there's also this great example from Senica. Senica talks about a certain rich man uh Celvivious Sabinus and he's the fellow who got a bunch of his slaves to memorize Homer and Hessiod so that he if he had forgotten something he could just refer to them and take pride in the fact that because his slaves were his he in fact remembered Essod and Homer. and so on. And he's I think he's that's sort of a perhaps a useful example about how just by externalizing memory in this case, you don't actually build knowledge. Of course. Yeah. This makes me think of one of the key insights of stoicism is that we often ascribe values to proxies or symbols that kind of represent or correlate with the things that are actually valuable. We love great people and so we praise beautiful people because we see that as a proxy for being great or good. And so we ascribe this value to beauty. And then the stoics come along and say, "Well, that's actually not a very good proxy. You know, that's actually not a very good symbol." And so now you love beautiful people. You stress about your beauty. But what's really mattered all along was your goodness. And what is goodness? It's your character, your virtue, your knowledge. And it makes me think of this where so Senica's example is you think we praise smart people. Smart people are ones that can say can recite Homer at on demand. and he's developed this method of getting his slaves to recite Homer on Demand. He goes, "Look, praise me." And it's like, "Well, no, that's actually a bad proxy. You've kind of got the the point confused." Um, and so maybe that's the risk with that's that's a risk with AI is we want to value as Stoics knowledge. We want to value as Stoics people that think carefully that um really understand the world and their place within it. And so we value I don't know the capacity to come to answers. We value the capacity to generate information. And so the AI kind of generates that does that for us. And we can say look look at the information. Look at how my ability to generate it. And I think the Stoic has to say, well, okay, that can be useful as a tool, but that's really we're really interested in your ability to kind of do that on your own, your ability to have these kind of epistemic skills of your own of being able to tell what's true and false, being able to come to good conclusions, to follow the rules of logic. And when you outsource that to an external thing, if you that becomes again like Epictitus would say, it's like you're praising uh you know, someone has a great horse that doesn't make them a good person. you praise the horse, not them. It's like if you have a good language model and a good ability to use it, that doesn't make you a good person or a smart person or an intelligent person necessarily. Yeah. Yeah. So, I think there's that there's that issue of conflation that can occur and I think it's going to get worse as these thing as as AI gets better and as non-experts become I think we're already at that point, but as non-experts get to the stage where they're unable to differentiate between experts and people using AI effectively and both people are going to get the same degree of praise in a way. I think the Stoics would think there's something weird about that. Yeah, maybe many so-called experts are also at that stage. But uh um I really like this. I really like this phrase from uh Plato. What you have discovered is a recipe not for memory but for reminder. And I think that hits on what you just said and perhaps a stoic angle on this which is the highlighting the internal instead of >> something external like reminders and such. >> Well, >> which are which are indifferent. I think what matters is is of course how you use them, how you choose them and such. >> This kind of gets to my second point which is that the Stoics have this metaphor. So that was kind of like the the risk in general. Now if we think about actual philosophy like how does how does AI impact your philosophical life? you know, maybe it makes you a worse programmer, maybe it makes you a worse economics student or something. And there's kind of risks to that. You need to be careful that point you made about, you know, um not recollection but reminder. Um or remembrance but reminder. Now when it comes to our philosophical lives, our ability to understand stoicism or become actual better ethical people, I think AI gets in the the way of digesting theory or might might run the risk of getting in the way of digesting theory. And what digesting theory was, it's it's a metaphor that the Stoics used for actually internalizing what you've learned to the point of self transformation. You know, you eat something because you read a book. It's like you're eating that information and then you need to transform it into muscle. It needs to be digested. It needs to enter your system. Um otherwise, you're not, you know, if you just vomit it back up, you're not rendering it valuable to you. And so, I'll do an Epictitus quote here. This is from Discourses 3.18. And Epictitita says, "Those who have learned precepts as mere theory want to vomit them up immediately, just as people with weak stomachs do with food. Digest your precepts first, and you'll not vomit them up in this way. Otherwise, they really do turn to vomit, tainted matter unfit to eat." Then show us some change that results from those precepts in your own ruling faculty. Just as athletes can show their shoulders as the results of their training and diet, or those who have learned various arts can show the result of their training, a builder does not come up and say, "Listen to me lecturing on the builder's art, but acquires a contract to build a house and shows by building it that he knows the art." And you should likewise eat as a man, drink as a man, adorn yourself, marry, sire children, play your part as a citizen, put up with abuse, bear with an inconsiderate brother, bear with a father, bear with a son, neighbor, fellow traveler. Show us these things so that we can see that you have in truth learned something from the philosophers. And so Epictitus's point there about digestion is you show you've digested and understood stoicism in your actions in your behavior, not in your ability to write recite theory, not in your ability to lecture on theory. And so I think when we get in I think there's a danger in AI using AI too much either in philosophical development or in ethical development about not having to kind of wrestle with these theories yourself. It's just like you know what does this what do the stoics think on X okay it generates it okay now I understand it but it kind of that's not understanding as we were just getting to you don't demonstrate that understanding without going out and act acting on it I think also debating with people having conversations like we're having you've got to really internalize it and make it part of your character and I I just think the the simplicity at which you can generate an incredibly complex response using these large language models um can maybe risks uh risk people skipping this step, risk people generating their own ideas, really wrestling with the theory and starting to internalize it. Um what do you think about that? >> Oh yeah, I think that's corre uh that's that's totally correct and very useful Epictitus quote for this context. I suppose there there really different levels to it. First, you you're using AI sort of in a consumptive way where you simply ask a question, get an answer, and that can certainly be useful for many tasks, but there's this risk we're hitting on where look, you're just not building that ability to generate an answer yourself. That's that's sort of one level. And then you can say, well, to fix that problem, I'll focus more on learning in unpleasant ways, maybe by using AI or with others. And I think something that can be useful is to answer the question yourself and then say what's wrong with this or how can I make this answer better with an AI. That's something worth trying. But of course then there's another level still where Epictitus might say it doesn't matter even if you can capture stoic the theory perfectly. What ultimately matters is is your actions of course. But nonetheless I think perhaps you know there there's that there's that halfway step where you are learning theory. It's important to learn theory and perhaps you can do that in a more constructive way with AI tools in a way that demands more thought on your own side. So I think that's perhaps something positive we can say here is that this this sort of consumptive model where you're just consuming whatever the AI feeds you perhaps not so good. But if you ask the AI to tell you what's wrong about what you just said, quiz you or the sorts of things, then at least you're making more progress even if it's not sort of the ultimate destination of philosophy. Yeah. And then there's that last point which is that you're going to have to get off the computer. Um but that's that's no different than their criticism of books, right? >> You have to put the book down at some point. Any other tool for learning is only in so good in so far as it prepares you for going out and doing things courageously, justly. Um and if it limits that, then it's an issue. But same argument against books, same argument against YouTube videos or podcasts or any other form of consumption. That kind of connects me to my last point. I I I tried to really paint the anti-AI picture. Not like, oh, this technology is new and that's intimidating, but really what what is AI replacing? It's replacing the kind of generative for me for me AI is like it's it's a it's a web scraper as it currently exists. It has an incredible capacity to scrape the web and then it has a it has an ability to like generate content and I think by outsourcing both this research and this generation capacities we run these risks of thinking we're smarter than we are know know more than we do which is the argument I tried to make but my third point is ultimately AI isn't indifferent it's an external um what matters is how it's used the stoics the stoics call death an external they call torture indifferent. If if if torture and death are indifferent, then certainly AI is. Even on the most negative reading of any of this, even on the the most cynical reading of it, it matters how it's used. And you need to engage with it intelligently and skillfully and maximize the benefits while downside uh downplaying the downsides. Um, and with that perspective in mind, I think the ultimate stoic advice would be to gain literacy, get a sense of what it can do and can't do, and be wary of the risks and then use it intelligently, which is kind of boring common sense, but it's the that's that that's the insight behind indifference. >> Yeah, I think I think this connects to one of my points. So we just jotted down some some topics to talk about which was sort of modeling AIS as assistants or servants and perhaps that gives a I think this could be a useful concrete way to think about where AI tools can help or harm. So the Calvisius Sabinus example I think is a great example of how not to use servants. Um but at the same time if you have access to a lot of servants and especially with AI you remove some of the ethical questions around using uh other servants to do particular tasks. You just have these artificial agents. Now you can get a lot more done. Perhaps even things you couldn't do yourself, but you certainly can speed up some of your own work, especially if you're doing some kind of knowledge work or software type work. Um, now you can get a lot more done with these AI services, agents, and so on, than you could previously. So, in the same way, you could get a lot more done if you had a bunch of servants at hand. And I think you if you think about some of the pros of having lots of assistants at hand, you certainly get more done. Maybe some assistants have novel skills that you can use for your particular circumstance. But at the same time, assistants are not a magic bullet. If you externalize too much, uh you might lose a sense of what you're working on, what's actually happening. uh even the best CEOs realize they can't uh they need to manage delegation with jumping into the details and so on and I think that some there's something similar here where using AI tools just to set up some process you still need to master the details uh quite often. So, uh, but I'm not sure if I stated that as well as I I wanted to, but I feel like maybe >> well, what's if if we if we got to the heart of it, what's the issue with the slave example? And then I guess what's the comparison to AI? What's what's Yeah, what's the negative use case? The negative use case is like you lose a kind of strategic oversight of what's going on or what the craft is or if if you really understand the craft, then you can understand where this tool fits into it. If you if you rely on these tools too heavily, you kind of lose sense of the big picture. Is was that your argument? >> Yeah. Lose sense probably both of the big picture and perhaps the small picture. >> All the pictures. >> Well, yeah. But if you're thinking about in the case of uh Sabinus, you know, what she trying to do? Well, he's maybe just trying to show off his learning and also entertain his guests. But uh you know, Senica says, you know, he made the life miserable for his guests and uh perhaps miserable for his slaves as well. And unless it was some sort of power move on his part, wasn't accomplishing what he originally set out to do. And I think that's uh I think that's maybe that that case of failure is obvious, but perhaps there's more subtle cases of failures. I mean, I think about this quite often in hiring where people think we just need to hire more people and that sort of becomes a a solution to a problem that demands more thought and reflection. Uh it's sort of a way of pushing pushing back problems. And uh perhaps you see similar uh similar issues with AI. you know, we just need to add AI to this process and speed things up or we need to without thinking about what's worth solving to begin with or what's worth doing to begin with in in the business context. >> Yeah. So, so good thinking if I try to summarize that good thinking is like kind of maybe systems based like it has a few it's not just like upping the firepower. It's not just upping the processing. It's it's a sense of the task we're undertaking. It's a sense of what's important. It's like a craft va b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b b based view of things. And if if you if you have a craft, you you really understand how everything fits together at a high level and you're maybe not adopting that craftbased view. If you're like, "Oh, I just need um you know, I'm having trouble. I'm having trouble with my workout plan. I just need AI to like tell me exactly what to do every day. Maybe there's some benefits to that. But um maybe that's like you you're kind of like thinking of the problem as that like I don't have enough servants basically and if I as you said if I have if I had a thousand servants all my problems would be gone. Um but we know that the problems are you know there there's a problem in terms of what we ask the servant to do. um there's a problem in terms of how the servant should fit into your system so to speak and I guess a good stoic understands that or or thinks at that level. >> Something like that. >> Yeah. Some also I think specifically with this example it's introducing AI tools is similar to introducing other people or other agents. I wouldn't want to take that too too far uh that analogy too far. But so perhaps single player crafts aren't the best analogy, but I do think multi-player games crafts and perhaps that's why I keep on coming back to a company related or business related examples can be useful because there you do see the pros and cons of bringing on additional person to a team or outsourcing some service to a third third party where you I think you need to be these sorts of questions come up around orchestrating these different parties well and being able to do that with assistance AI assistance in this case it is a skill of itself and there's questions about when do you go to the AI assistant how do you monitor them how do you judge their output uh and so on so yeah I still like to feel like this isn't quite as tight as I want it to be but uh the assist I think the assistant analogy works because there's like different different tools at play with their own skills and affordances and such. >> Yeah, I think it makes sense. I mean, maybe I'm not maybe what I I'm thinking isn't exactly what you're trying to communicate, but um the Plato example was this kind of like rope memorization, right? It's like don't just don't just repeat a line, know the line. And like, you know, if I'm if I just have the lines written down on a piece of paper or poster on my wall, I don't know them. I'm just able to look at them and say them. Um, and that's different. And I'm thinking this is kind of like the same argument, just kind of a level up, which is like, uh, don't just like bring on more assistants or people. Understand the craft, understand what you're aiming to do and the role those people play. And you can kind of if you think oh I just need you know if I just had AI automating this everything would go you know my my my workflow would be so much smoother my my day would be so much more efficient and there there's that kind of by just thinking about the problem as one of scale and then AI as an ability to kind of like increase the scale or or automate things you're I don't know you're kind of walking away from the systems level thinking or walking away from like really what's important or essential which is partly stoic but partly just good thinking, right? And the Stoics were good thinkers, which I they would be against anything that encourages lazy thinking or kind of incorrect thinking. >> That's the that's the way I'm thinking about this. >> No, I think that's well put. Yeah, that's really well put. Cool. So, and I think that this line of thought points at some some of the positives as well of the risks of using AI positive because you can solve problems perhaps you weren't able to solve before as a society we might find uh particular innovations uh the AI allows us to unlock in the scientific domain or otherwise. But of course there's also going to be issues with managing the performance of these systems and how we integrate them and to our own social groups and so on. Um, cool. So, one other thought I had, I think you'll probably agree with this, but I'll be curious if you take the uh the opposite side, which is I think Stoics would be against AI friends and in particular the use of AI that's modeled closely as a person that you interact with on a uh day-to-day basis. Uh perhaps there's some in between examples they'd be fine with, but I wrote this piece recently on the called the age of sirens on sto a letter which is specifically focused on grock and these uh sort of very visual uh seductive AI type characters that you talk to purely for entertainment. I think on one hand there's there's there's the obvious argument which is that you know this is distracting, not really focusing on anything particularly important. It's pure entertainment and would have some of the similar uh arguments against it the Stoics gave against uh pure spectacle and whether it's in the gladatorial arena or uh what have you. So I think there's that kind of argument, but I think there's also this sort of this thought that AI relationships just are fantasy. They're a simulation of something that's not real. They're not as valuable as the thing itself. And if anything, they should really play a to the extent that they're trying to substitute for the value of a real relationship, they're uh not advisable and stoic to be against that. >> Yeah, I think that's right. the the one interesting idea here is that the stoic argument for friendship you sometimes see I don't have my exact sources down but some people say that the stoics refer like some ancient sources say that the stoics refer not just to virtue is good but also even true friendship between two virtuous people because with true friendship then you're like admiring virtue like that that's what makes friendship good is like seeing the virtue in the other person and admiring it and understanding ing it. It's like you're not doing that with an AI agent. You're not admiring virtue because there is no virtue. You're not fulfilling your role because you have no sort of ethical obligations or responsibility to an AI agent. So you're it is just a hedonistic function is just you just you find it pleasurable or enjoyable. And then I think the point you raised which is like it's kind of a more dangerous kind of hedenism because I'm not saying hedonism judgmentally. It just means you're just doing it because you find it fun. And it's a more dangerous kind of fun because it's a replacement. Um I'm not always I'm not the biggest fan of these kind of arguments always. Like I always roll my eyes. I play a lot of video games and I roll my eyes at the kind of idea that oh video games are some sort of replacement for real life accomplishment or achievement. You know, you're replacing your your human or masculine desire to go out and, you know, win the battle and conquer the war with this like online simulation of war or something like that. I I I think those those arguments are kind of out of touch a bit. Um, you know, you can always take something to an extreme. And I think but maybe that's the difference between, you know, an AI for fun and like an AI friend. Maybe that's the extreme. You know, if you're like, "This is actually my friend. This is actually my person I go to for advice. This is actually my person that I go to to to feel better or to like emotionally regulate." Maybe once you you cross over from like this is kind of a fun thing to play around with or joke with or test the limits of to this is a companion, maybe that's when it becomes dangerous and and goes too far. I'm just trying to reconcile the fact that I agree with you, but I don't find these arguments compelling with things that I enjoy. Like I don't know, am I a hypocrite? Is there a type difference? So the argument was that there's a type difference with AI friendship because you know friendship is a thing you do specifically with a person. um where something like achievement or accomplishment you can do that with a game that's fine. Yeah, I think there's perhaps with um with games you have sometimes I think the the sort of uh what's valuable about video games isn't the video game itself but if you think about relationships real relationships can be created by video games and that's was certainly underrated by uh many of the early criticisms of uh video games but also there are specific skills you can develop within a video game. Um, and then just the point of achieving itself that might be might be worth doing and the appreciation of a kind of the work that went into the video game. I think there's a whole range of uh ways one could appreciate video games in that sense. And perhaps there's something you could do the same on AI, but I think you're to me the value for AI friends can't be in companionship. It has to almost be in something novel. that these tools provide, which perhaps I just haven't seen that voiced well yet. But it can't just be companionship, engagement. It has to be something. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Perhaps like in the video game case where you realize, oh, people do create real relationships in these online games. >> Yeah, I understand this. The the point is like, look, we haven't explored with this enough. We're not 100% sure that there's no value here. But if there is value here, it's not from friendship because it's not real friendship. It's a it's a simulation of friendship. It's a simulacum of friendship. Maybe there's some other value. It's, you know, self-discovery. It lets people explore themselves. It lets people develop their thinking in a safe space or something. I don't know. But it's not from friendship because that's just you're not getting you're not getting that here. And there's a danger to the simula to thinking that a simulation of it is the real thing. >> Yeah, I think so. And perhaps it's a useful training for the real thing. >> Yeah. The the big theme of this episode is the we got to end on something that isn't hitting on the nerds. I feel too bad about like the people with AI friends. So, they're already they're already down, Kayla. We don't want to hit them any >> Yeah, that's true. Um well one positive aspect I of AI that I uh perhaps haven't made too coherent yet but one here's one thought you can think of it as a mirror of the logos. So Cicero has uh he's the best person I could find this line of thought but I think you see it in other stoics as well. this idea that you can see nature itself in technology. Um, it's not just a appreciation of nature. You know, there's that fantastic passage from Marcus Aurelius where he's meditating on the flex of foam in a Boris mouth and seeing that that too has a its own kind of beauty in terms of how it's connected to everything else. But in technology itself, you can see a kind of beauty and the order of things. So, Cicero uses this as an argument for design. You know, when you see a sund dial or water clock, you see that it tells the time by design and not by chance. How then can you imagine that the universe as a whole is devoid of purpose and intelligence when it embraces everything, including these artifacts themselves and their artificers? I think this is a one way to take this sort of line of thought in this context is uh as an appreciation really of the technological accomplishment of these LLMs and perhaps a reminder to think about how their structure you know maps on to certain forms of reasoning itself and uh there's a kind of value in that. What do you think about that? >> I like that. I like that idea of it's I mean I think it's funny that Cisero's example was a sund dial and our example is a um you know AI. We've come a long way Cicero. Um but I love that idea of um the universe embraces everything including these artifacts themselves and these their artificers. There's a beauty to the human mind and AI is not replacing a human mind, but it's able to kind of simulate certain aspects of our reasoning and our thinking in ways that we haven't been able to do before. Um, yeah, that's that's a really cool thing. I guess it's just a more optimistic view after being pessimistic, right? It's a really cool thing. there is like risk involved. We we don't know what's going to land with certain career paths. We don't know what it's going to do to the educational experience of high schoolers. There's like there's there's risks that come with this stuff. But we have been able to create something that more closely simulates interacting with a person than has ever been done before and interacting kind of the logical thinking process of a person that has been done before. And there's something beautiful about that. It's not, you know, it's not like it it's not like trees are beautiful and then concrete is ugly. The Stoics are they're more They they think nature is beautiful, but then they also think the products of humans are um also part of nature. They're part of the universe. The universe contains everything. And so there's something to be appreciated about them as well. Um I I just think it's a good it's a good um reminder not to be like laid about this or not to entirely reject it. There's risks. They should be acknowledged both for being a stoic and for otherwise. But um you know in incredible human accomplishment accomplishment um that we will we will benefit from. >> Yeah. Absolutely. So my la the last point that I wanted to hit on is thinking about the virtue of prudence. I think ultimately, you know, whether you should consider AI or not depends on your situation and the so are excellent about reminding us to, you know, don't make the mistake of worrying about something that's completely out of your control, whether it's the development of AI, economic trajectories, geopolitical events, what have you. But at the same time, depending on your circumstance, it might be a mistake to, you know, be completely passive about developments in this arena and ignore the elements of AI when they could be useful either to your work life or personal life. But I think there's always that turning back to the Plato that we began with, you know, prudence is something that needs to be internal, but it shows itself through how you make decisions regarding the external world. And uh I think what the what the stoics give us is of course that focus on the internal and you think about prudence itself not making the mistake of worrying about things that are completely out of your control but at the same time not being passive when some of these things do become relevant to you and you need to make decisions about them. So that's not uh any specific guidance, but I think it's uh probably an essential reminder and something that I keep on thinking about. You know, what does prudence look like in my uh personal life, work life with these with these kinds of tools? >> Yeah, I it comes back to my same indifferent point and it's boring in a way because it's not this it's not this controversial position. Um yeah, you you've got to be prudent. You've got to be careful in how you use it. Watch out for the risks. Lean into the benefits. But I I think the something that comes from prudence though is I think you you have to kind of engage with it. You should you should become literate in it because you can't use it prudently if you don't understand it. And so I think that's like the learn a bit about it. If you're not using AI yet, say use it more. If you are using it, be prudent about how you're using it and the role that it's taking on in your life. and watch out for these dangers especially around kind of overconfidence um or around replacing things that are better acquired outside of AI friendship as an example but um maybe advice about certain things as well um and all of that requires prudence so you can use AI as an o like it's an indifferent it's an opportunity to exercise your virtue so don't just ignore it but exercise your prudence in figuring out how to use it. Well, >> yeah, absolutely. It's really an empirical matter. If you haven't played with these tools, you probably should. Uh that's perhaps not true for everyone, but it's true for many, and that'll give you a better sense of the limitations, risks, and benefits. >> Yeah, I think it's really cool. I think I think for me last non-S stoic closing thoughts on AI. I'm at the age where this is kind of the first major technology shift and so maybe some of our listeners have gone through a couple of those before. Like I'm sure plenty of people listening are like pre-in. I'm just at that age where I can remember not having internet but basically had it all through high school and you know a little bit before then. So, I wasn't there with this like major paradigm shift and it's exciting to see how it pans out. You know, which which parts of its benefits are over exaggerated and which parts of its benefits are not discovered yet and which parts of its risks will turn out to be the right ones. But I I think we know for certain that the stuff we said today of you know use it exercise prudence understand the role it should have in your life and you know if your goal is knowledge and knowledge and virtue be careful about ever outsourcing any of those to something else. That's something that you you have to develop yourself as a stoic. >> Excellent. Well said. Thanks Michael. >> Thanks. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
