---
title: "Stoic Ideas That Cut Against Modern Culture (Episode 213)"
slug: stoic-ideas-that-cut-against-modern-culture
episode_number: 213
youtube_id: vTdbq1zkaDU
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vTdbq1zkaDU
upload_date: 2025-12-09
duration: 50:18
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stowa Conversations. My name is Caleb Antiveros and I'm [music] Michael Tromblé and today we're going to be talking about seven politically incorrect truths from the Stoics. It's a recent article I wrote on the STOA letter. You can find that on Substack. And we thought it'd be fun to talk through, or at least I thought it would be fun, [laughter] I'll speak for you, Michael, to talk through the these seven and go into more depth with them and develop our thinking. But essentially, I was thinking of, you know, what are some stoic claims that sort of cut against modern politics and culture broadly speaking. And uh you know, stoicism is a life philosophy of course. that's principally about how to live well and that by necessity involves some amount of if not conflict certain claims uh being made that might cut against contemporary culture, contemporary views of course of what a good life consists in. So I thought of seven. We'll go through each. What do you think? >> Yeah. No, I am excited. I mean, agree with you. It takes a position and whenever you take a position, you know, stoicism isn't really adding any insight. If it doesn't tell you what you're doing is wrong or doesn't say what with the average person or what is uh typical part of our culture is wrong. If it doesn't call out anything about that, then it's not really adjusting your behavior. So, it it has to be committed to be transformative. It has to be committed to different positions. Some of those are more controversial than others. We'll go through some of the controversial ones today. Um, and the Stoics also have this trai tradition of I think it's a rhetorical device like reing in being controversial. There's the stoic paradoxes by Cicero, but I I I even feel like a lot of the the ways the Stoics would phrase their arguments would be intentionally extreme or controversial. And so I see you following in that tradition, Caleb, that this is a this is a modern stoic paradoxes and fits right in. >> Perfect. Perfect. Well, our first uh truth and our first stoic claim is the idea that just jumping right into it. If politics makes you unhappy, that's a you problem. That's one way to put it. I think the central more precise claim which follows from stoic ethics, the stoic vision of life is that politics cannot make you unhappy or happy. Which in a way I think really does cut against the ordinary way a lot of us interact with whether it's the news or political discussions. You know, pe people naturally think that political turmoil, injustice of different kinds threaten our pursuit of happiness. You know, they threaten the picture of the good life. And and I think the radical stoic idea that no, externals cannot impinge on your happiness has the obvious upshot that political externals cannot threaten your happiness either. And I I do think this cuts against a lot certainly a lot of political rhetoric of people making claims about perhaps them being owed something by the state because you know not having sufficient uh say material wealth or what have you prevents them from pursuing happiness. or others making the claim that certain forms of injustice uh threaten theirs or others pursuit of the good life. So, and the Stoics just I deny deny that you know that's an philosophy that's ultimately focused on you know the internal that's what makes a good life or not. So, what's your take on that Michael? >> Yeah, I agree with that. I would add two nuances or one nuance you said you know the stoics say externals can't make you unhappy or they can't threaten your happiness the the stoic position is they can't make you unhappy without your participation they can't threaten your happiness without you you know making a mistake as well and so yeah politics can make you angry politics can make you unhappy but that's what I see the thrust as your point and I mean you you wrote it so correct me if I'm wrong but that's a you problem because you're participating in that in that anger. You're participating in that you're letting it affect you basically. Um or you're letting it you're letting it um disrupt you. And so there there's no necessity of that. That's a participate. You're participating in that. You're making a mistake. You're judging the situation incorrectly. I think that's that's part one. So yeah, and agree with agree with what you say, but just making that nuance of lots of people are unhappy being online or being in uh kind of addicted to news in a way that um riles them up, frustrates them, makes them chronically anxious. But this position is just like that is a character fault. That is something it is not the fact that the world is broken is why you are anxious and angry. is because you have an unhealthy relationship with politics and with the news. >> Mhm. >> Um, and then the second piece I would add there is that, you know, cuz the really common example, the really common counter argument is always, well, what am I supposed to do then? I'm supposed to just do nothing. And that's why I think this is uh well written. It's not politics. If politics motivates you, if politics incites action from you, that's a you problem. If politics makes you do some sort of coordinated effort to improve the circumstances of others, that's a you problem. That's not that's not the commitment here. It's that if politics makes you unhappy, um that's a you problem. And I think that's a much more defensible position for the reasons we just stated. It's not about passivity. It's that you say, "Well, I can't be happy if Trump is president or I can't be happy um if if this kind of policy gets enacted. anything like this is is just I that's just antithetical to stoicism, right? It's like it's that is having no sort of constraint on your happiness. It's your way of thinking about it and relating to those things. >> Yeah, absolutely. And of course, I think if you've been listening to this podcast, you know that stoics are not promoters of political passivity. If you're newer to stoicism, I think that's a central point. Of course, that's not what we're saying. In a way that's almost a uh you know stoicism is a uh demanding philosophy. You know, it wants your [snorts] all to, you know, be stoic in the face of local turmoil, but equally, you may be, you know, you might be called to make serious sacrifices in order to promote justice. At the same, you know, at the same time that uh you develop an inner citadel, part of being a stoic uh is acting in a just manner. And that might require uh serious political engagement of course. So I think that's uh that is of of course a central point that uh we need to make and uh yeah go ahead. >> Well no just we need to make it every time. Um but it's it's important and it's an important distinction. It's not it it politics can and should motivate you. you have responsibility to other people in your community, your neighborhood, your country, humanity. Um, but any sort of any sort of claim or way of thinking of just I'm just anxious because of this thing. I'm I'm unhappy because of this political situation, it just it's a stoicism always puts that onus, that responsibility back on you. No, you're unhappy because of yourself. >> Um, you to play. >> Yeah. And some situations might be require more advanced stoicism to be happy in than others. But at the end of the day, you you put that responsibility back on yourself. Yeah. I suppose also another way to develop this point perhaps going deeper into it is that so the stoics I think it's important to promote justice. uh and [clears throat] you know how we think about the world of course is going to influence you know the degrees to which we uh are just or not because that influences our actions and I also think how we speak is often of course an expression of how we think and perhaps it sometimes things go the other way as well the way we speak influences how we think which is just a long way of saying per perhaps a stoic will talk differently about many political matters than is common. So instead of making these sort of arguments that justify, you know, political positions, votes, what have you, that are grounded in, you know, something being a threat to the good life or something being required for the pursuit of happiness, they might ground them in instead, you know, ideas of kinship or uh fairness, uh some of these other components of virtue uh and justice in particular that we've discussed. uh as opposed to okay you know some other vi visions of of the good. >> Can I so just to put an example so if I say like trying to think of an I mean might be a might be a bad example or controversial example but you try to talk about some sort of like welfare program or lunches for kids in schools and the stoic isn't going to make some sort of claim about well it's impossible for someone to be happy when they're when they're poorly fed. Um, and so we have this we have this obligation or it's it's it's unhappy for someone in poverty to to live a good life. So we have this obligation to pull people out of poverty. It's going to be some sort of claim instead about if we have the money to be able to afford to do this and we have some a kinship or connection with people within our own country. Um, we have a responsibility to do that. Um, it's going to be something like that. It's going to be an appeal to justice, not an appeal to people's fragility. Is that right? Is that where you're going? >> Yeah, I I think that's right. I think that's a good example from the left perhaps uh where uh sometimes people might assume or in fact do argue that you people need a certain you know living standard in order to live well and uh I mean there's some level with that's true but in developed countries I think stoics would say nearly every person meets that living standard to live well uh so long long as their life is not being threatened. Uh so they wouldn't I think ex exactly exactly that they wouldn't ground the case in uh you know material goods being required for the pursuit of happiness but rather instead of ideas like like fairness or you know your your fellowship with other citizens uh and and and so on. Um and perhaps a case from the uh rights or at least positions that are commonly associated with the right is sometimes people will talk about immigration sort of radically changing the nature of the country, your city, your neighborhood and that sort of being an obstacle to living well. You know, this used to be my city, but now uh newer generations or people have moved in with alien cultures have ruined it. And because they've ruined the city, uh you know, I'm unable to live in the way I want to. And I think the Stoics would would stop especially at that last line, you know, unable to live in the way that you want to. No, that's not, you know, immigrants don't have that power over you. You know, whether or not you get the welfare check doesn't have that power over you. And I think that's the that's probably the where the line has some amount of bite. >> Yeah. So the I mean we're just on point one of seven so we might we're going to we're going to uh we might have to move on but um there I guess there was an additional nuance there when you hear politics makes you unhappy I think news podcasts you know memes on Instagram that get you kind of riled up but then there you have this other point about if there's some sort of political policy and you think I I you know my life hinges on this political policy or like I'm I'm really angry because um you know I don't have the capacity to live well um with this change. The Stoics are going to say that you know that that that change doesn't have the power over you to take away your capacity for happiness. And you know it's a two-sided claim, right? Because it's a really nice claim if you're down on your luck and you want to feel empowered. Hey, you're feeling really down, things are bad, but like know that you can make a good life for yourself. That's a very empowering claim. Mhm. >> But when you're wanting to feel validated for your anger or you're wanting people to agree with you, it feel it's a very painful claim. Like, I'm really angry about this. Well, um, doesn't really have the ability to ruin your life. Seems like you're doing that to yourself by being so angry about it. That is a very it it hurts kind of slaps when it comes there, but it's you can't have one without the other, right? They're the same. Just depends on what if you were looking for the medicine at the time or not. >> Yep. Yeah. Absolutely. Uh and that's certainly I think that connects to uh this point about anger especially our second the second truth for the stoics which is that anger is never appropriate. And that's that's something we've discussed before. We'll link to some episodes where we go into this in more depth. But this is just a can I mean this is a cananical stoic position. It's a hard line against anger and it's this view that you know even in a world full of corruption, incompetence, injustice, what have you, you know, revenge is not justified. Anger is not a uh is not a valid state. It's a negative passion. Um and you know of of course there is um there is always that uh point that perhaps some form of again I well it's a similar point to the point about politics I suppose there's this idea that sometimes pun arguments for punishment or retribution of some sort can perhaps be made by stoics but they're not going to be grounded in this idea that you know someone has harmed you therefore or they deserve to suffer in order to make up for the serious harm that they've done to me. Yeah, I mean I agree with all that. We've talked about this before. Um the thing that really grounds it for me is this this almost like practical argument where anger is like self-defeating. Like if you're angry, it's because you want some sort of change to the world. But being angry actually makes you less effective at bringing out that change. Makes you less in less intelligent, less able to like respond to changes in circumstances effectively and accurately. I think about this in ever in sport, you just never encourage an athlete to get angry because it's just not an effective way to execute skill. Um it feels very motivating, but but in practice, it's pretty ineffectual. And then I was almost thinking about it like the I don't know this is too of an online example but there's that meme with the bell curve where it's like the person at the bottom of the bell curve thinks one thing and the person in the middle thinks you know position two but then the person at the top of the bell curve thinks position one again. And I almost think that the reason people object to this stoic position is that there's almost two reasons you can be without anger. You can be without anger because you're non-s stoic and don't care. Uh, and in that case, yeah, it's like, oh, somebody just insulted your brother, your sister, and you're not angry. That's kind of weird. It's kind of a weird thing position for a non-S stoic to take. almost agree that for somebody who's progressing and isn't hasn't developed the stoic skills yet, it's almost like better to be a person that's angry and is like connected to or interested in these ideas of justice or improving the world. It's almost like better to be that than somebody who's not stoic but like doesn't care about injustice or doesn't care about improving the world or doesn't care about honor or any of these things. But then the the end result like the stoic position you end up without anger but you're without anger for a different reason which is that you realize that it's not appropriate. You realize that it's not effective. Um was that making sense? It's it's like I think it it feels inappropriate to people because they assume you're that first person that that non- stoic who just doesn't care about the thing. But if you're if you're if you are not angry for a stoic reason it's the same kind of response for a totally different reason. Um yeah, what do you think about that? >> No, I think that that that that certainly does make sense. Like one another way to think about it is [snorts] probabilistically I suppose where if you take you know the set of people who are not angry about an injustice, most of them don't care about it. Whereas the people who are angry about that justice they do that that injustice they do care about it. So anger is then evidence of >> caring about and in this case injustice something one should care about. And I think people think the same in personal relationships. You know you didn't care that you know this this bully hurt me that means you don't care about me at all. So I do think there's there's an important upshot for Stokes which is that you need to show that you care by other means. you you can't rely on these uh common social heruristics we have about anger or displays of anger or take sort of the epitus type strategy you know don't maybe grown outwardly but not inwardly I think is the the other approach here but >> yeah Senica uses the example of like screaming at children [laughter] just because they like respond to angry adults but not actually being angry like just like but scolding them in the way they're used to teachers scolding them. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly that. Which uh >> Yeah. I think that's that's a useful example for the the concept. [snorts] >> Yeah. So anger is never appropriate, but you can still scream at children in the right context. [laughter] We're still leaving that. >> Yeah. Yeah. And I think it does bring that obviously does bring up the you know the failure mode of I mean sometimes it's obviously inappropriate to be angry outwardly and inwardly to people. So >> Mhm. >> Uh it's not always the it's both that matter. All right. Next one. Neither victimhood nor victory are moral credentials. So I think in a lot of political social rhetoric there's this idea of either putting victors sort of in a special place. You've got the successful athlete, the wealthy entrepreneur, the uh you know beautiful person, what have you. And many cultures discussion or such will implicitly grant a kind of moral credential to that person. You know, because you're rich, you pulled yourself up by your bootstraps or something of this sort that says something good about your character. Alternatively, other cultures might say the reverse. You know, because you're poor, a minority, or on the middle class, whatever it is, because in some sense you're a victim, you get a different kind of moral credential perhaps. Uh I think a common example of you know many polit politicians will speak as if the middle class had some ability to come up with political insight that other classes do not or something of this sort in a way that at least implicitly it seems to assume that they have a kind of moral standing that perhaps other classes do not. Um whereas I think the stoics think this isn't. So you know the it could be the case that you know some of these different classes do have insights that others don't but nei certainly neither have none of them have any kind of intrinsic moral advantage whether victor or victim and I do think rhetorically these sort of appeals to either should have limited power. Um, so yeah, what do you think about that? >> I mean, I love this one. I think this one's really important. Two things I would say about it. Just agreed with what you said. One thing, one thing Epictitus would say is Epictitus would say, um, you know, look at the kinds of things you associate with goodness or you think about goodness and it will tell you what you value. So, you know, if you find yourself like being like, man, these beautiful, strong, young athletes are great. It tells you something about what you value. You value these external things because you're making kind of a category mistake. Um you're you're associating these these people with good like you're lumping all the good things in together. Um same thing with victimhood. If if will uh you're lumping in things that don't necessarily correspond with each other together. And so that that part of that stoic goal is to pull them apart and say, you know, yeah, you can be you can have had a rough upbringing and be insightful or you can have a rough upbringing and just be like a terrible person. And same same thing with a good athlete. Um, and practically we I see this a lot in jiu-jitsu. You see this a lot in people who have achieved power who are able to like exploit that power. Like somebody assumes a black belt in jiu-jitsu is like some sort of moral authority or some sort of life coach or even just generally a good person because they've obtained expertise in one domain. And then as you said the flip side of that is somebody who you know they grew up poor or they had some terrible life circumstances and now we need to privilege their perspective over other people. I think about this in terms of umwame apaya was wrote about lived experience and he he was talking about how we should the the point of valuing lived experience is to value is to just treat it as a source of evidence but not treat it as a trump card and I feel like sometimes we do that in terms of victimhood is we we previously we just didn't listen to people that didn't have power or weren't you know traditionally educated or weren't able to um communicate in the traditional forums and we've almost shifted so far that it becomes this like enlightened form of knowledge or expertise that other forms have to defer to which doesn't necessarily make sense to me when you're asking answering complicated questions about politics or policy or things that go outside of of those domains. I mean all that that's just a long way to that was some just some examples of where I see it both in valuing people that are victor have you know victories and valuing people that are victims but the stoic line is just going to be you're you're clumping things that don't belong together. Um you you think being strong is good, so you think strong people are good people. And um being strong is not good. So you shouldn't mix other types of strong of goodness with that judgment. You're making Yeah. conceptual overlap that's not helpful. >> Yeah, I think that's that's well put. And uh the case of thinking about these uh results, thinking about, you know, victimhood or success as perhaps giving unique forms of evidence is useful without granting a trump card. You know, perhaps uh you know, perhaps people who are educated do in fact have more knowledge than those who aren't about specific things they've been educated about or encountered in their life. But of course, obviously, the reverse might be true as well. >> Well, it will just be a case by case basis. And so, >> you just don't make a >> you don't you don't bias either way. >> Yeah. Just on a case by case basis. And I think it's that trump card feature that I want. you consider the evidence and the same way you don't discard the evidence uh because the person is either a victim or a victor. Um but you don't give a you don't give a trump card either way either. >> Mhm. Yep. All right. Next one. You don't get to choose all of your roles. in some ways as a common sense idea but I do think there are some strands especially in western culture that are so individualist that uh they might disagree with this. So I you know I do the stoics the common view of the stoics is that you have a number of different roles fundamentally you are a human being a rational animal and then uh you have roles depending on your social situation your personality and not all of these roles that they think are important to fulfill are ones that you've chosen. Lictitus has a line from discourses 3.2 two where he says it's you know it's essential that I preserve my relationships the natural and acquired ones as a pious man son brother father and citizen so not all of those roles are chosen but the stoics think it's essential to fulfill them well be excellent in them nonetheless and I think there's there certainly is a strand of thinking that's uh you more individualist. This idea that, you know, you don't need to you don't need to perform well in a relationship unless it's one you voluntarily reflected on and chosen. You know, you didn't choose to be brought into the world. You didn't choose to belong to this city, nation, what have you. You didn't choose these loyalties. Therefore, you don't have any responsibility or obligation or calling with respect to any of them unless you decide you do. The Stoics I I think the Stoics just straightforwardly just don't agree with that. They think look some of you can have a role, obligation, responsibility, calling even if you aren't even if you didn't decide to take it up as some sort of voluntary independent being. >> Yeah, I agree with what the Stoics say. I think this is as you said at the start um seems common sense but actually pretty controversial if you try to put into practice and I think of the example like an example with family because I mean the role the roles that you don't choose it's the ones about being your a human like the the basic respons moral responsibility of being a human and then it's your family your relationships um you know you don't choose your brothers and sisters or your parents parents, but you do choose your romantic partners, for example. But, um, that idea that, you know, you have you have an obligation to family regardless of how they've treated you can feel kind of stifling or unjust. I do think there is that stream in in modern culture of, you know, this needs to be reciprocal or this needs to be even otherwise I'm being exploited, I'm being taken advantage of, I'm being abused. >> Um, and all those things can be true. [laughter] they would say that just doesn't erase um that doesn't erase the the fact of the matter about the family relationship and the fact of the matter that that brings certain obligations and maybe that obligation is just you know this is not to say the stoic thinks you need to invite uh I I'll keep on the terrible family member example the stoics aren't saying you you know you need to invite your terrible family members over and you need to give them a place in your house to live rentree and you got to put up with them if they're um you know being mean to your kids or something like this. But maybe that just means that you don't do anything like you um you know don't punish them or kick them out of your life in a way you would a stranger. Like there's just there's just kind of a higher bar or maybe you know they insult you and you don't insult them back. You just are are more stoic about it. >> There there's a kind of a higher bar of of of relationship. Um, yeah, it's it's a it's a fuzzy one. Um, but I agree with you. The Stoics would say there there's a there's certain facts of the matter. Those facts carry responsibilities, and you need to figure out how to carry out those responsibilities effectively. You don't just get to cut somebody out because you don't like them. >> Mhm. Yeah. Absolutely. I like this statement from um Brian W.V. Nordon. He's a philosopher and it's it's about the Confucians actually. And I think this is a common view in other philosophical schools. But he summarizes their view in contrast to perhaps a more western autonomous idea that we're born free. He says we're not born free. We are born with obligations to parents and other relatives who will raise us to adulthood. To teachers who shape us far beyond what is required to just earn a paycheck into the pre-existing civilization that makes all our individual contributions possible. And I think that has uh this passage in particular makes me think of one reason why the Stoics think these roles are important is because you are part of a larger system, right? you know, you're part of your family, of course, but also your city, a school, uh, and ultimately a civilization. And those sorts of things matter. I think they may they have a again respon you have some responsibility, obligation perhaps, calling with uh, with respect to each of them. Mhm. And I'm going back in my mind to that meme of the beginner, intermediate, advanced uh person. >> The midwipet meme. >> The midwip meme. Um and you know the beginner follows relationships because of social norms and because like non-reflectively uh that's what I was told to do. That's what society pressured me to do. Then you advance a little bit and you start to question those norms. you start to seek truth. You maybe reject it a bit. You abandon some of some convention. And then the stoic position is then you then say, "Hey, well, these conventions were grounded in kind of truths about the world. Maybe they get distorted. Maybe they don't they're they're not right and how people always put them into practice, but there was some truth behind this. and I'm gonna now consent into or actively participate um in these roles, treat my family a certain way, you know, pay a certain respect to um elders or teachers because I I recognize that this is kind of like a natural fact about the world. I almost think this is like a very conservative strain of stoicism. this idea that, you know, there there's there's certain kind of there's these immutable facts about the world and a lot of society is responding to them and sometimes getting them a bit wrong. You know, like health is good, wealth is like the health is a preferred indifferent, wealth is a preferred indifferent, people are kind of getting them wrong and exaggerating them. And so if you if you gain some philosophical maturity and you return to them, you'll see the truth in convention, but you'll come at it with a more kind of philosophical stoic bent or bend. >> Yeah. Yeah. I do think yeah, there's this is plausibly one of the more sort of to say right-wing uh stoic views, but again, it's a traditional view, not unique to the Stoics at all. And it's perhaps the more uh it's I I I do think it's the the the position that rejects this view that's more historically anom anomalous and perhaps more radical in a way. This is the Stoics being somewhat conventional. >> Yeah. It it it's it's only controversial in response to like a last h 100red years of time rejection of these social roles and inherent connections to family and things like this. [clears throat] >> Cool. Next idea. that this is not something that Stoics explicitly said or could have said, but it's the idea that nearly everyone today lives in luxury. It just simply follows from the fact you know these uh Epictitus and Masonius Rufus scolding heckling their their rich Roman aristocratic students for living in decadent luxury for having access to immense material wealth when you know hundreds of years later we've had immense material progress and all All of us have access to things uh I should say all of us in developed countries have access to goods that even aristocratic Romans couldn't dream of and our general living standard is exceptionally high even for you know doing really basic things like keeping the lights on throughout one's house throughout one's day access to food uh a sanitary of course matters are an order of magnitude [gasps] better managed. So I think and I so I think that's something to keep in mind when one's reading the Stoics when they are especially when they're bothering their their students for being living in luxuries that even if it if you're not at the top of the totem pole for uh as far as um you know material success goes uh in your life, you might still be up there historically speaking. You probably are in fact uh in a similar position to you know the the students that uh Epictitus and Mousanius Rufus for giving such a hard time for living in a decadent fashion. >> Yeah, never thought of it that way before. We we we like to make fun of the rich Roman kids, but uh yeah, pointing the finger back at us. Yeah, absolutely agree on this one. Again, it's just basing things not not maybe in relative terms, but just in objective terms. Um, objectively we we're incredibly well off, even people in relatively poor positions. I would like to say like if you're listening to this podcast, I mean, I can't speak for everybody, but you're probably, you know, that that nearly I really really want to limit it to just like a a select few of people in kind of abject poverty and uh really terrible conditions. Otherwise, we're we're doing quite well. Um, and I also think about this in terms of access the philosophy like also if you're listening to this podcast or you know Caleb what you and I are doing the the people that would have the reason everybody's rich uh that you're reading about in philosophy is just the free time to do nonproductive work that somebody in the kind of working class let alone a slave would just not have. But today we have the freedom, you know, I can go and download an audio book and I can like listen to Homer on the way to go to the grocery store and buy all these exotic fruits other people would have never seen before and I can just be like I can I can just think be listening to the Odyssey while I'm walking around my street. And so the access to to even this world of ideas because I sometimes think about I don't want to take things too much off topic but I sometimes think about this criticism of stoicism the same way you might criticize um religion because religion goes well anybody can be saved or at least Christianity or some version of Christianity. Anybody can be saved as long as they accept Jesus into their heart. And they say well what about the you know remote indigenous people that never heard about Jesus? Like what about them? And then stoicism says anybody can be happy as long as they like internalize this like correct these correct stoic values. And it's like well what about the person who's never heard about stoicism who can't read who never got any chance to engage with that and and we have that opportunity or at least you know most people in in um western society or um have this ability to engage with philosophy in a way people people just couldn't before. Yeah, I I do like that point focusing on sort of the intellectual wealth we have access to. Uh in some ways perhaps more important than the material wealth we have access to. So I think that's that's a good addition. Cool. We've got two more and uh not too much time. Can always work on time management. We're still learning after all these years. Uh we spent too long on the first one every time. >> Yeah, we did. [laughter] [gasps] >> Uh so the next item, some lives are better than others. This is uh just follows of course from the Stoics having a view, an opinionated view on a philosophy of life, what it is to live well. Of course, some lives involve living well, others do not. I think this is a this is a a clear upshot of stoic philosophy. At the same time, it's worth saying that the Stoics were often careful cautious about making judgments in individual cases. You know, saying that so and so is uniquely a bad person. But, uh that uh I think that that being said, there's they still make judgments about actions. Certainly they make judgments about actions being not virtuous particular thought thought patterns not being healthy and sort of the fundamental sense of human flourishing as well as you know perhaps certain behavioral patterns not being conducive for living a good life. >> Yeah. Yeah. No, I mean I mean um I agree the this is another one that falls in that category of something that would not be controversial 100 years ago is maybe controversial now. Um, I think there's this strain of thought now about we can't be judgmental of other people or you need to understand their circumstances or their story or people kind of value pluralism. Like there's different ways to live and each way is good in its own regard. And it's just a kind of value realism. Like there's some good ways to be and some bad ways to be. And if you if you have if you are a bad person, you have a bad life. like um and if you're a good person, you have a good life and that means that some people's lives are better than others. And it's just like if this is not true, what's the point of philosophy, right? [laughter] Because the point of philosophy is to live well, which is which means that you to live better than at least you could have lived, at least a different version of your own life, right? [clears throat] >> Yeah. Absolutely. And I think it's the consistency that gets stoics others into trouble here is that they're consistently judgmental about behaviors, actions, thoughts. I think everyone believes, you know, someone who pursues wealth out of greedy motive, you know, that's not a good thing to do. That's a indication of a bad life. uh but at some point maybe there are some some cases where they won't make judgments about uh you know in a way the Stoics are always making they think there's a a better decision when it comes to even rather ordinary matters uh concerning anything from diet to you know munius Rufus talks about of course consumption the sorts of uh things one has in one's house to uh more weighty matters concerning justice courage uh and self-control So the Stoics are certainly certainly have views on on what what one ought to do and that involves some amount of comparison. >> Yeah. Which is good. You don't need to necessarily agree. You can philosophically engage, but you you have to kind of enter the question of philosophy with a view that some lives are better than others. Um otherwise, like I said, otherwise what's the point? So I just think it's a good thing. um even if it might be feel judgmental it's like it's it's for the best. >> Mhm. Yeah. It [clears throat] can be useful thinking about I like the example an example of thinking about your own life you know how would I judge my life if I behave this way or this other way and uh I think another concrete upshot is of of course the advice Senica gives this explicitly around you know deciding what sorts of people you're going to have around you. Yeah. Involves uh certainly involves judgment about who's living well and who you can learn from. >> All right, we got one more. No one intends to do evil. to say this view of Socratic intellectualism it's sometimes called which is I think it's a natural this is one I think one of the more radical stoic positions again moving back moving out of the conventional that the Stoics believed really no one is attempting to do what's evil by their own lights >> they're aiming to do their best they're simply be ignorant about the nature of the good. And uh there's I think there's a one quote they make explicit reference to from Plato which is a Socratic idea which is that every soul is deprived of the truth against its will. This idea that people are aiming to do act according to what is good by their light but have often have mistaken views about the nature of the good and as such uh do evil not because they have some pure sort of base desire to do evil but because they're mistaken about uh the nature of the good life. >> [snorts] >> Yeah, this is because you titled this politically incorrect and so I'm thinking who's politics and it's funny how we're kind of jumping back between right-wing and leftwing. So I I you know the idea that some lives are be better than others. Maybe that's more politically incorrect to people on the left. Uh same with this idea that like you've got certain obligations to family which are just like special and there's nothing you can do about it. But then this is something that maybe is more politically incorrect to the right who like really focuses I think on moral responsibility and is okay with concepts of like the death penalty as or more in favor of ideas like the death penalty for justice or like punishment because you're like a bad person who's run to the core. You you you killed these children. and you should just you should just die, right? You deserve it. Um and so this is almost like pushing back against that. It's this it's this idea that as you said, we're all deprived of the truth unwillingly. People want it connects to the previous point, right? People want to give live good lives. Some lives are better than others. People want to live good lives. It's like the Stoics would say it's psych psychologically necessary. That's the that's the Socratic intellectualism part is that it's like it's impossible to intentionally try to make your life worse because as a rational being you're just this thing going about selecting the preferred thing in each situation. Um so you can't make your life holistically worse. It's like psychologically not possible to make that choice. So anybody who is living a bad life is is ignorant. Um they're mistaken. They have a they have a distorted picture of reality. And I think it's it's really profound. It it's helpful for yourself for forgiving yourself, understanding yourself, understanding the nature of moral progress. Um it's helpful for moving away from this picture of like original sin or some sort of like inherent flaw in us. Um the flaw we have is is is ignorance. And that's that's one that the Stoics think we we can overcome. So I I love this idea. I think it's really really important. Yeah, I think it's it's uh probably one of the one that's most difficult to internalize. I suppose it's exceptionally difficult never to experience anger, but at least it's an intellectual matter. I think this one's uh uh more difficult for me to internalize um to the extent that those can be uh distinguished. But uh I do I do think um I it is an interesting point to think of this as more leftwing. You know, it's a common pattern to perhaps look at uh [groaning] less than desirable behavior or problematic behavior and point to, you know, someone made a mistake, it's because of their their previous experiences, their social position, or >> uh they just acted under the false information or something like that. So perhaps that's a more common leftwing type type move. And I think certainly that can have uh you can do that poorly. You can excuse or deny someone's agency, but fundamentally that move is correct for the Stoics. >> The idea that, you know, it's they're not intrinsically evil. Even the worst uh people you can imagine, they're mistaken. >> Yeah. It's like it's like that and then you add a butt to it. It's like you you're evil because of your circumstances, your beliefs, your upbringing, the systemic factors that made you where you put you where you are, but it's up to you to fix that, to improve that, to change that. So, it's like this this recognition of the circumstances that have led there. It's like you're not flawed because of you, but you're only going to get better because of you. um or you can only look to yourself to get better. And so it's like that that nice mix of acknowledging circumstance while still having personal accountability. >> Yeah, I do think all of these have there there's a sort of pattern of uh at once sort of acknowledging that much of the external is in a way irrelevant, but you're still coming back to uh the internal your ability to have agency and such. >> Mhm. without in this case, you know, having uh an evil soul or, you know, some desire that's purely bent on pursuing something that's bad that's can't be can't be changed. >> Yeah, good point. >> Awesome. Well, summing up then these seven controversial ideas from stoicism. There's probably some more, but I think we hit on some of the main ones. First, you know, politics can't be an obstacle to your happiness. Second, anger is never appropriate. Third, neither victimhood nor victory is a moral credential or a trump card. Fourth, you don't get to choose all of your roles. You have natural roles that are not voluntary. Fifth, nearly everyone today lives in luxury. I think especially uh our listeners and such, people who interact with our content generally come from uh the developed world. Sixth, some lives are better than others. And seven, no one intends to do evil. Yeah, [snorts] great list. >> Awesome. Let us know what you think and uh thanks for listening.
