---
title: "Stoic Exercise Tier List (Episode 199)"
slug: stoic-exercise-tier-list
episode_number: 199
youtube_id: oRLDaOcq5qM
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oRLDaOcq5qM
upload_date: 2025-09-02
duration: 34:24
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Michael Tromblé and today this is a solo episode where I'm going to try something a little bit different. I'm going to go over a ranking of 10 Stoic exercises. And this is a ranking based on how effective they've been in my own life in improving my life, helping me apply stoicism, helping me deal with difficult situations. And so the point of the list is to yeah it's really a personal list. So I'm not trying to say when I go through these exercises not trying to say one is inherently better than another. It's not a comment about the strength of the stoic arguments. It's really about in my opinion how much I've enjoyed putting these into practice or how beneficial I've found using them in my own life. They're all pretty popular exercises, so I don't really have any ones on here that I think are bad. So, even the ones at the bottom of the list, they're just not my favorites. They're just not the ones that I like to use or the ones that I've found to be the most helpful. I just wanted to provide that context because something low ranking, again, not necessarily bad, just one that I don't enjoy. And so, there'll be kind of two benefits here. One is going over these exercises. So there's um if you're not familiar with some of them, maybe maybe you'll learn a thing or two. There'll be a new one or a different aspect of of one that you already know that I'll discuss. And the other aspect is kind of getting some insight into somebody I who's put these to practice in their own life. I've considered myself a stoic in some capacity for probably close to 10 years now. And in I've always looked at stoicism as a as a way of life. Even though I came across it in uh academic context. I was studying stoicism a masters and then ended up getting my PhD in stoicism. I was always at that time looking at it as you know a way to answer the question of how to live. And so even when I wrote my PhD, my PhD was on moral development in Stoicism. It was on how to cultivate virtue. the kind of exercises and training methods the Stoic recommends. So, I'm really interested in these exercises. I'm interested in applying them to my own life. I'm interested in rec recommending them to others. And so, I thought it'd be fun here to kind of recap them and then talk about the value or lack of value they've had for my own life. Again, really to emphasize what I personally like or don't like about them. Not trying to say uh you shouldn't use the low ranking ones and not trying to say the higher ranking ones are better even if they don't gel with your style or your approach to stoicism. So with that context in place, we'll jump into it. So here's ranking 10 stoic exercises. So number 10, the one one of my least favorite um and I should say all of these are pretty good. Still the all of these are ones that I still use. But number 10 is the view from above or adopting a cosmic perspective. So this exercise it entails viewing your experiences in life from a broad cosmic viewpoints. Seeing events as part of the universal nature, not as you know an isolated occurrence that's happening just to you, but seeing as part of its broader context and also expanding your view to understand the interconnectedness of all things. And so it helps to diminish the perceived importance of trivial matters and to reinforce your connection to a larger natural order. This is something that Marcus Aurelius consistently employs. He talks about viewing himself viewing his life or the world from the stars. You know, imagining yourself up in the sky looking down on what was going on and then asking yourself from that perspective, would these things still matter? you know, do these things have as much importance if I take on this this view from above? And again, like I said, all these exercises are good, but this ranks low for me because you it's not one that I really use. So, it can be helpful when I get hyperfocused on myself or I catastrophize. Sometimes I do that. Um, sometimes I I'll take the view from above and just kind of think, well, if I take a step back and I don't make myself the main character of this, you know, is that is this such a bad thing? But it's it's really just like not part of my tool belt. It just hasn't clicked. It's not something I turn to when I'm in a moment of crisis. Maybe I could, maybe I'm missing out on something here, but it's just not really the the stoic exercise that I, you know, that I use. And that's why it's getting this low ranking. One thing I do do which I think is related to this I I don't literally imagine myself from above but sometimes I will use that exercise of kind of expanding um your time horizon. So asking yourself you know will this matter in 3 months? Will this matter in 3 years? Will this matter in 30 years? Or is this just something I'm stressed about because you know I've got a stressful presentation at work tomorrow or I have to have a conversation I don't want to have. Sometimes I will kind of expand my time horizon. I think that's related, but you know, zooming out and viewing myself from the stars, seeing myself as part of a larger planet, not just an individual, not not really something I I do or use in number nine. And again, I'm kind of ranking the greatest hits here, so all of these are pretty good. You It's not bad to be in the number nine spot. If this was a tier list, you know, none of these would be F tier. We're just kind of talking C or B tier at this point. But number nine is premeditatioum or the premeditation of adversity or bad things. So this is when you mentally prepare for potential future misfortunes, illness, loss or death by imagining them in advance. So the purpose is to lessen their impact if they occur. So you know an example of this is the Stoics would say well Epictitus gives this example of when you're kissing your child asleep at night you know whisper to yourself you're a mortal being and you two will die and people really kind of shudder at that one they go oh god Epictitus is this terrible person he's thinking about the death of children and that's premeditatum malorum though Epictitus would say is you know this is this is a thing that you you're probably ignoring you're probably not thinking thinking about because it scares you and then when it happens you're not really prepared or equipped to deal with it. So what you want to do is you want to think about it. You want to imagine the possibility so then when it comes you're prepared for it. You're equipped. You're ready to handle it virtuously. The reason this is so low on the ranking for me is I think it's something that was really helpful for me when I started practicing stoicism but now it's not that helpful. When I started practicing stoicism, there is this real insight of stoicism which is that you know you should kind of accept or consider these bad things or these things that you perceive to be as bad. You should recognize that they exist and not ignore them. I find nowadays I I do that most of the time. And I find now I'm at that point in my stoic practice where it's it's not that I'm ignoring things, but it's that I'm judging them to be bad incorrectly. And so I'm I'm upset by things because of my value judgments, not because I'm surprised. And so I I tend to go to more conceptions of stoic theory going back to to thinking about this idea that virtue is the only good or vice is the only bad that is more helpful to me than premeditatumorum. You know when I when I describe it this way I think maybe that I've just internalized the lesson. So I don't really need to sit down with it as like a intentional strategy but it's not really something I carve out a lot of time for. Maybe if I'm doing something new, I'll think about premeditatium and I'll say, "Well, what are the bad things that could happen, but that's related to a future exercise that I think handles that better than this one." So, number eight on the list, getting up into things that I would do that I'll do consistently, but I don't think are the most impactful or the most important single exercise. Number eight on the list is voluntary discomfort. So this is when you intentionally do difficult things. You intentionally subject yourself to things that make you uncomfortable. This is the classic example of the cold shower. Senica recommends sleeping on the hard floor, eating plain meals for a week or two every year, even though he's obscenely rich. And so the goal here is not to, you know, not trying to be atheet aesthetic. You're not trying to undergo pain unnecessarily like there's some sort of moral benefit to that. You're trying to prepare yourself for future pain. Strengthen your mind against these future difficulties that you'll encounter. There might also be this, you know, kind of a resetting of yourself. This ability to kind of enjoy more basic things too if you're not always being spoiled or not always being exposed to uh luxurious extravagant things. Um, so the the you know the insight here, the core insight here is that doing tough things is good for you and I think that's an important insight. Um, I think that's true. I don't know if it's necessarily a stoic lesson. I don't know if it necessarily connects that much with stoic theory. It's it's a it's a very important thing and again like pimemed tattooorum, it's something that I've kind of built into my life. Uh, sport plays that role, exercise plays that role. I I do Brazilian jiu-jitsu, as you may know, and kind of getting beat up by people in a very safe environment is is my voluntary discomfort. I'm choosing to get squished or choked or beat up by people when I'm practicing martial arts. And so, yeah, I think it's part of a good life, but it's it's not uh it's not like a focused exercise I turn to. Maybe it's more like a habit you should have. Um, and I also think if I if I had to play devil's advocate and criticize voluntary discomfort is I just think that life has enough hard things that it's very rare we have to add additional discomfort. Probably even if your life is luxurious or even if you know you don't experience physical pain, you're not really doing any difficult things, there's probably something difficult in your life that you're ignoring. Whether that's being kind to people, whether that's forgiving someone, whether that's strengthening a relationship or addressing some family drama or something like this. I just think that like sometimes there's a risk with voluntary discomfort of externalizing progression where we say, "Oh, there's there's nothing in my life that I need to work on, so I need to go and, you know, run a marathon or I need to go and lift heavy weights." And that can sometimes distract from the fact that there's there are like just a lot of things we can often work on in our lives that relate to our relationships, our families or our careers or things like this. And so I think voluntary discomfort can sometimes be distracting from that. So moving on to exercise number seven, this is daily reflection. So this is the practice of engaging in self dialogue, meditating on stoic principles, reviewing one's actions, judgments, and thinking processes, and your progress towards stoicism. One way to do this is journaling. I don't think it's the only way to do it. I think you can also have conversations with people, philosophical conversations. I think if you're like me, um, you'll just think about these things as you're walking around. I think I have like a very philosophicallyincclined mind even before I studied philosophy. That's why I started studying philosophy in school is because it appealed to me. And so I'm the kind of person that will just kind of chew on these questions. So I think the way you do daily reflection depends on who you are. Maybe if you struggle if you don't find your you're terribly self-reflective on your own, maybe you need to journal. If you think your self-reflection is actually biased, maybe you need to have conversations with friends or other people studying philosophy or things like this. But daily reflection is just that that practice of you're you're trying to internalize stoic ideas, absorb them intellectually, make them part of your life, but you're doing that by intentionally reflecting on them, holding space or time to think about them. You know, if you're if you're listening to this podcast, I would consider that daily reflection. You're spending some time thinking about philosophy right now and thinking about these exercises and how they might relate to your own life. So, good job. You're already checking that box there. I think I do a lot of this already and it's a good exercise, but it's almost like a minimum. It's almost like a baseline, I would say. So, I think, you know, you're almost not doing stoicism unless you're holding time for reflection and and self- scrutiny. And the other thing about it, the reason I say it's like a minimum is it's also a means by which you you consolidate what you've learned through other exercises. So you know you're practicing premeditatio. You're practicing the view from above and then you sit down and you reflect and you say well did I actually did that work? Did that help my stress or my anxiety? Did I internalize the lessons that I was thinking about what Marcus wrote about what Epictitus wrote about? And so daily reflection, it's it's it's really important, but it's like that that base. It's almost like a a baseline requirement that you use to consolidate or improve the effectiveness of the other things that you're doing. And so for me, I think I rank it low for that because it's almost like garbage in garbage out. Like if you don't if you're not reading good books, if you're not doing the right exercise, if you're not thinking about the right parts of stoicism or other philosophy, then I think your daily reflection is not going to be that useful and it's something that I kind of already do anyway. I I'm I tend to be really really self-reflective. And so, yeah, it's kind of middle of the pack for me. But very important, and I think adding some structure to your reflection is really essential if you're struggling with that um or don't know where to start. And that's where journaling can come in in handy. You know, writing ideas down, writing about your opinions about philosophy, it's a great way to consolidate what you've learned. So, now moving into number six, I think everything above this list, you know, if we were doing a tier list, everything six and up, we're kind of in the A tier. These are things that I think are really transformative, some of my favorite favorite exercises, things that I find have been really impactful in my own life. So number six is momento mori or remember death. And this is an exercise to um as like it sounds build in an understanding of the fact that you will die into how you live and the decisions you make and also overcome that fear of death which is so common for so many of us. Um, you know, the the Stoics don't think that death itself is a bad thing. Rather, the bad things associating death are incorrect judgments, our fears. And so, by accustoming ourselves to death, understanding that's a natural part of life, understanding that's a thing that everybody has to do, we can remove a lot of the negative feelings and associations with death, both for ourselves and for other people. Right? All right. I was talking about that stoic exercise early of reminding yourself that your child will die at some point. Maybe maybe after you, likely after you, but at some point that's also kind of a momento mory exercise. It's reinccorporating this idea of death into our life. I think we're with this one, we're really getting into the transformative exercises, the ones that will really change how you live. I think overcoming the fear of death is probably one of the most important things uh you can do and I I also find it helpful not just not just for like anxiety like what's going to happen when I grow old but also for kind of appreciation of the moment in in my studying of momento mori or my focus on momento mory using this exercise has really helped me you know ask is this exactly the life I want to be living right now. Um, is this how I want to be spending my 20s? Is this how I want to be spending my 30s? Um, am I around the people I want to be around? Am I doing the kind of work I want to be doing? Kind of brings those questions to the forefront of our mind because we're not saying, well, things will change or I'll have other opportunities to do these things. It's kind of like, no, you're only going to be the age you are now once. You're only going to get to live this period of your life once because you're on a finite timeline and you're going to die. And that doesn't necessarily have to be a bad thing, but that should inform the kind of decisions you make. And it should give a kind of intensity to your day-to-day action and a purpose to your day-to-day action. And I find find that's been very transformative for me in terms of how I live my day-to-day. So exercise five is expanding circles of concern. The Greek for this is oosis. The oos is the Greek word for a home. So it's really like the Greek is like homification almost means bringing more and more more people into your community. That that's the metaphor. The homification is like you know you you treat people that live in your home your immediate family with a certain amount of care. And the stoic exercise here or the ethical goal of stoicism is to expand that sphere of concern. Okay. Well, you've got yourself, you've got your immediate family, the people in your home. And now treat the pe your neighbors like they're part of your home. Treat your country, your, you know, your state or your province like it's part of your home. Treating all of mankind like it's part of your home. And so that's the stoic exercise of iciosis is to take that sphere of concern and expand it out and out and out until you include more and more people. I like this one because of all the exercises, it's the one that's the most not individual focused. You know, the goal is to become a more ethical, kind, just person in terms of how we treat other people. I also think it's true like I think it's a correct lesson that or at least where I am I I I have a I don't extend the proper concern that I should for other people or you tend to become biased towards the people that are close to you and you forget about other people or ignore other people. And so I always feel better. I always think I'm getting closer to the truth when I expand that sphere out. And maybe you're kind to a stranger. Um, you know, maybe you show some empathy or concern for something that's going on outside of your immediate bubble or country or kind of identity. And I always think that's like a right thing to do. It's hard to do, but that's the that's kind of the sweet spot of the stoic exercise for me where I think, well, I have something to learn from this. Finding it really challenging, but I have something to learn. And that's so that's icosis. Now, moving up to the final four, I would see that these are the real heavy hitters. This kind of the S tier for me. I think if you could practice any of these, you're well on your way to becoming a better stoic and a better person. And so, the fir the first number four, that's the dichotomy of control. Distinguishing what is and is not up to you. So, this is we've talked about this a lot on this show. I'm sure most people listening are familiar with the dichotomy of control. That's epic is this distinction between the idea that some things are up to you, some things aren't. And then the exercise part of it is that you should focus your concern on the things that are up to you. And you should practice detaching yourself from the things not up to you. And really, this is, you know, I think if I think it's the first part of Epictitus' handbook. If you had to distill stoism down to one lesson, there's a good argument this is the lesson to do because the rest of stoic theory kind of falls out of it. This idea that virtue is the only good falls out of that because virtue is the only thing that's up to you. How you act, the decisions you make, that's the thing that's up to you. And then all these other things that um disrupt people's lives, their concern about their social standing, their concern about their their wealth or power or, you know, how they how they're positioned next to other people. All of those things are things that are not up to you. And so, you know, there's that theoretical distinction. It's a good distinction. The exercise part is actually practicing caring about virtue and caring less about those other things, those external things. Caring about the choices you make and being okay if the results don't go your way. Um, and if you get there, if you can get there, you're most of the way to stoicism. You, you know, you're you've got a really solid foundation. If you asked me a couple years ago, I would have put this one higher. Probably would have been my number one, but it's something that I think I've kind of made some good progress on. So, it's not really at the front of my mind. I don't find it quite as challenging as iciosis. It comes to me quite naturally now, and so it's it's a little bit less important in my practice nowadays. So, that's the dichotomy of control. Number four. Moving to number three is what's called the reserve clause. So this is a little bit more technical, but it's basically when making plans of action. You add a res reserve clause to it. Kind of a conditional phrase like if God wills it or if that's, you know, if that's a bit too theistic for you, something like I will do this thing so long as that does I don't have to compromise my character. so long as I don't have to get upset or become, you know, too too passionate about it. And so this allows you to both be committed and enthusiastic and engaged in the world. You're like, I'm going to do this. I'm going to go and I'm going to try my best at the sport game. I'm going to try really hard to be successful in my career. I'm going to, you know, pursue this romantic relationship and hope this person likes me back. Any of these things that I think make up a good life, you you've got to you've got to still be even though the dichotomy of control is an important stoic point, we've got to be go out going out and acting in the world and trying things and living our lives. Um, but the reserve clause is the way to do that. It's like to have the commitment but also um you know not be unstoic and not go too far. And so Epictitus has this lovely passage where he's like when you're about to go to the bath house and in ancient Greece or ancient Rome I should say you think of the bath house a social place. There's lots of people around. You think of going to the grocery store um or you're going to a water park or something like this. place where you're going to be around people that are going to be annoying that are out that you wouldn't spend time with normally. You're just around crowds of people and they bring all the great but also all the awful things that crowds carry with them. And Epictitus is like, well, say, you know, I'm going to go and I'm going to enjoy the bath house and spend as much time as I can there in so far as it doesn't affect my character, in so far as I don't let it upset me. And so if you find yourself in a position where you're like, "Wow, I just actually can't, you know, I can't push any harder at this job. I can't um, you know, pursue this relationship in in a way that is not going to affect my character, not going to lead to unstoic consequences, then you know, at that point, well, I've tried my best. that done the things in my control and if I go any further I'm really placing my hopes and my expectations and things outside my control and that's dangerous. So I love the reserve clause. It's a great exercise, something I need to practice more. It's really how you balance trying with stoicism. You know, you will try and care until it affects your character. And it's a way to be stoic but not just fully apathetic. Um, you know, that's that I think is the secret exercise to being a stoic that is still quite successful, engaged, and achieving things at the maximum of your potential. So that was number three, the reserve clause. Number two, my second favorite exercise at the moment at least is I call it embracing challenges as training. You might also call it the obstacle is the way. So this is the idea of you know instead of enduring difficult things instead of cultivating resilience you want to almost cultivate this perspective of anti-fragility. That's something we've talked about before on this podcast. Antifragility is that this idea of um I don't just survive things. When difficult things happen they make me stronger. Epictitus uses the analogy of an athlete. He says it's difficulties that reveal what men amount to. And so whenever you're struck by a difficulty, remember that God, like a trainer in the gymnasium, has matched you against a tough young opponent. And so this is just this idea of, oh, it's not, oh, woe is me, poor me. This this difficult thing has happened. It's like, okay, I've been placed with a challenge. What can I learn from this challenge? How can I grow from this challenge? Where can it make me stronger? Marcus Aurelius has a line paraphrasing this one because I didn't I didn't write it down but it's it's the obstacle is the way and his line is about how you know the impediment to the path becomes the path you know the obstacle becomes the way essentially and and he's he's hitting on the same kind of idea there that if your goal is just to improve your character and you say well I'm going to improve my character by pursuing my career I think that's a great way to make the best use of my talents and make a positive impact on people and then you get fired or you encounter a challenging boss. Then if if your job if your goal was the good career you it's related to the reserve clause, right? If your goal was the good career, now you've got a problem. But if your goal was the good um character, well then okay, I've got fired. Well, that's another opportunity to improve my character. That's another opportunity to learn resiliency, learn um to recreate myself. Maybe it's an opportunity to get a different job now that I know more about myself. And so the obstacle is a way it's again it's also a way of remembering the dichotomy of control. Remembering that your your goal is good character if you're a stoic. And so these things that seem like problems remember they're not really problems. They're learning opportunities. Marcus has another metaphor of, you know, be like the fire. Whatever gets thrown into the fire doesn't put it out. It makes it stronger, makes it burn brighter. And we want to be like that as much as possible. And what makes this an exercise is that you really need to reframe things. You need to like put your reframing hat on and sit down and think about it carefully. Otherwise, I'll find myself just getting negative. I'll find myself getting really stressed or anxious. And so, I have to take the time to reframe things. I have to really do it intentionally. But when I do that, it makes me feel better. So, it has this emotional benefit, but then I also just think it's true. And I think it's more useful than being anxious about something. So, it's one of my favorites right now. It's the obstacle is the way. And then number one, my favorite stoic exercise uh is the examination of impressions and ascent. Might also call this pro in the Greek. That just means a kind of attention you give to what's going on. So this is the stoic strategy that whenever you receive an impression, you want to recognize that that you're receiving an impression. Recognizing that that might not actually be the case. You know, you feel that way. You're arguing with somebody. You're arguing um with a friend and you think, "Wow, this person's being a real jerk right now." You get this impression, but that might not be the case. So it's first first recognizing that that what you feel is not necessarily true and then pausing and then interrogating the truth of what you feel. Is that is that a correct judgment? Is that something I want to hold on to? Is that a belief I should form? Um as Abictita said he said when you receive any impression you should always say hold on a moment impression. Let me see what you are and what you're impression of. Let me put you to the test. And that's what this exercise is. It's critically evaluating the content of these impressions before you accept or reject them. This stops us from spiraling uh into negative moments where we we end up being angry or jealous or anxious or whatever negative feeling we can have. It kind of gives us a moment to stop those negative reactions and it also gives us an opportunity to employ these other challenges we talked about. I think this is really this is why this is my number one um exercise is because I talked about number seven journaling and for me journaling is like if you're already doing the work journaling is going to make you progress faster it's going to consolidate what you're already learning from stoicism but if you're not doing the examination of impressions and ascent if you're not doing pro you're not having attention or or giving attention to what you're thinking and feeling then you just can't do any of these other exercises. All these other exercises require your attention. Um obstacle is the way reframing something that requires your attention. Um the reserve clause that requires your attention and your focus. If your attention is outside your control, you you just can't do the other exercises. But if you master your attention, then the other exercises will be easy. And so I really think attention is the difference between stoicism being theoretical and stoicism being life-changing. It's it is the difference between theory and practice. Because if you don't if you don't intercept I don't know if intercept is the right word, but it's like if you don't you have to not allow your life to be on autopilot is what I want to say. You can't just move through the the flow of life feeling what you're normally feeling. There's no self-improvement there because it's just it's just routine. You need to break the routine. And you break the routine through these exercises, but you only apply these exercises through attention by thinking carefully about what you're thinking, interrogating what you're thinking, and then using one of these strategies we talked about today to break your routine pattern. Because if your routine pattern was good enough, you wouldn't need to practice. You wouldn't need stoicism. So, you need to kind of get in there, intercept those thinking patterns, uh, apply one of these exercises. But you can only do that by being really reflective on what you're thinking, noticing your impressions, and controlling your ascent. And so that's why it's number one for me. I just think it's it's it's mandatory. Um it's it's necessary, not just as a as a benefit, but as um the foundation of all these other exercises and all all stoic improvement. So that was my list. One more time from start to finish. I had at number 10 the view from above. Number nine, premeditatio malorum. Number eight, voluntary discomfort. Seven is daily reflection, self-crutiny. Also can include journaling in that bucket. Number six is momento mori. Number five was oosis, the expanding circles of concern. Number four is the dichotomy of control, distinguishing what's up to us and what's not. Number three is the reserve clause. Number two is obstacle is the way and number one was the examination of impressions and then careful ascent or pro in the Greek. And so this is my list. These are some of my favorites. Um as I went through this I I realized going through this list that you know number 10 is is view from above is great. It's like it's a great exercise. I really did the greatest hits here. Maybe I should do another episode where I talk about some exercises I see on the internet or some things people talk about that I think are bad. None of these are bad. This is a ranking in terms of my preference, the ones that I think make a biggest the biggest difference in my life, the ones that I would want to keep if I had to give up any. And that's really those last, you know, the last four or five of these. Those are the ones that I think I would really need to hold on to where I think I'd be okay if I had to give up view from above. And that's really the kind of the the the idea of this ranking. So, thanks for listening. I hope that was helpful. Hopefully learned a bit both from the exercises themselves and then also my reflections on practicing stoicism and the effect they've had in my practice. Let me know in the comments or send an email which of these are your favorites. If you disagree with anything I said, happy to see how other people are putting stoicism into practice. Thanks everyone.
