---
title: "Stoicism, Freedom, and Ernst Jünger with Sam Alaimo (Episode 204)"
slug: stoicism-freedom-and-ernst-j-nger-with-sam-alaimo
episode_number: 204
youtube_id: rPkRMkIo-k4
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rPkRMkIo-k4
upload_date: 2025-10-07
duration: 50:09
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Caleb Anttoveros and today I'm speaking with Sam Almo. Sam is a former US Navy Seal. He's got a masters from Colombia and he writes at what then.org uh and is a co-founder at Zero Eyes. Um so a very busy man. Thanks for joining. >> I really appreciate you having me. Thank you. >> So uh what's your story? broad question, I know, but uh how do you describe yourself? How do you describe your work? >> Uh I started writing uh at what then.org early last year. Uh I've always loved the idea of of writing down my thoughts. It was never about the writing. It was about the living and then the thinking and the studying and then writing as a means to um solidify that and then communicate that. And uh going going public was super super difficult for me in the community I came from in the military. You typically don't have social media. Uh you typically don't go public. That was back in the day. It has changed obviously. And uh I dip my toe in the water just putting some initial thoughts out there early 2024. And then just fell in love with the rhythm of it. like the the the weekly cadence. There's something significant about it where you can get on a rhythm and continually perpetually create new material and then keep digging deeper and then questioning and each essay could be a different riff on a particular topic and then you you can begin to ping it from different angles and it became just this complete passion project to the point where I started out primarily doing stoicism. Then it branched into this this sort of metaphysical um exploration I have of an idea I'm working on in my book at the moment. Um we can get into that later on. But it I realized you don't have to contain yourself to one niche focus. You could basically go wherever your interest and wherever your ideas are taking you. And uh if it's compelling enough, if you're if you're, you know, adequate enough at a writer, and I I try to be um you you can you can develop a a a solid base of people who not only just read it, but give you feedback. And that's the best part about it. You're getting live feedback. Whereas with a book, you can spend three years writing it and then maybe get feedback when it's all done. You're going to know real quick when you do a Substack or a weekly newsletter if that has any redeemable qualities whatsoever. And then you can begin to adapt and you become a better thinker at the end of the day. So, it's been a wild ride so far. >> Very nice. Yeah, I think um it can be easy to write something, push it out, and you don't get a lot of feedback. And perhaps even the exercise of writing itself didn't feel that valuable, wasn't that enjoyable. But I think that something comes out of doing that again and again that you don't, and this is probably true for any habit, that you don't get from that those initial foray. So, I think that's a good good reminder from what you just uh what you just said. >> Yeah, I I love it. I love the iterative capacity. Um, and uh, just seeing where it goes over time. So, it's not even been 2 years, but the the the vacasillations between the subjects I focus on, the the watching my style change over time. Um, like that that in itself is is totally worthwhile. When you think about most most writers, most thinkers, a lot of them, you often don't even hear about them until they're in their 50s or 60s. So, when you start when you're relatively young, you a year is nothing. a year is just it's 120th of what it's going to be by the time you actually hit your stride with the your particular idea or focus or style or voice or tone. So that is exciting in of itself because you know you're accumulating all this work that over time you're going to be able to look back on and say, "Wow, my mind used to go there. Look how it's changed. Maybe I got better. Maybe I got worse in this way." It's almost like the value of keeping a journal. You begin to see how your mind works over time. And in that way, you're able to make significant changes in the positive way you want to make them. So yeah, I wouldn't trade it for anything. I'm going to keep going as long as I can. >> Well, how do you describe stoicism these days? you know, what's your uh how do you think about it? Has it changed since you began writing or since you first encountered it? >> Yeah, very much so. Uh I first understood there was such a thing as stoicism as a as a study, as a philosophy um after I got out of the military. And it was super helpful because when you're when you're in the thick of it, when you're in the mud, when you're in a combat situation, you embody many core stoic principles without knowing that it is stoicism. And then when when I got out, when a lot of people I know got out, uh they they experienced this void. Like all of a sudden ease is far harder to deal with than hardship. And uh stoicism kind of swoops in there and it it it codifies it puts the words what we already knew. And it makes sense because if you look at Epictitus, he wasn't preaching to slaves. He was preaching to the wealthy aristocratic sons of wealthy and influential Romans. So Stoicism itself is built for an affluent society that is experiencing existential boredom and meaninglessness. Like that's why it was invented. You didn't have pre-state tribes who did stoicism. They lived it. They didn't need the philosophy. So, it's a major thing now because the world we've invented, this modern world, the west, like all the all the exceptional things that we that we value, think freedom, affluence, luxury, privilege, they also have really destructive potential as well because they divorce you from reality. They divorce you from hardship. They divorce you from the very things like injury, pain, death, etc. that make you completely ingrained in the present moment and very grateful when you get to survive the night or very grateful when you get the warmth of a fire. All of a sudden the minor things become major things, wonderful things. And stoicism is a great way of reminding you, hey, you have a very lucky position and it could very well turn back on you unless you learn how to use it well. So like when it comes down to stoicism, I wouldn't I'm not a I'm not a stoic in the same way. I'm neither a Democrat or Republican. Like I don't subscribe to every single aspect of stoicism, but the core pillars of Stoicism on how to live a better life. Yes. Yes. I'm all about that. It's literally life-changing philosophy. >> Absolutely. Yeah. The point about affluence makes me think about, you know, Masonius Rufus, Epictitus scolding their students, you know, hammering their rich aristocratic Roman students for having so much luxury. And if you think about today, you know, even the typical American, it's got the equivalent of hundreds of slaves worth of energy at their fingertips. And uh I think they would be harsh on us too, even even if you're not in so-called economic state of elite in a developed country. So >> yeah, >> I think that's absolutely true. >> Yeah, the value in there is it's a really awesome way to put it. I never thought about the value of an iPhone in terms of the number of slaves, but you're you're absolutely right. I wonder what an LLM would be. How many slaves is that? Is that two million slaves? How do you value that? >> Yeah, that's difficult. I think that's a difficult matter. I guess people think about that in terms of employees or assistants, you know, but I have thought about and I don't know the best way to put this, but there is a sense in which the LLM is, you know, you don't have the ethical qualms that you do with having an employee. You can have it do whatever you like, but it it still has the same kind of risks uh and affordances. um in the sense that you might go to it in the same way you might go to an employee to solve issues you should solve by yourself and it has its own not it doesn't literally have its own interests but it it's going to have its own uh patterns that might not be aligned with yours in the same way you know leading employees requires some amount of leadership ensuring that your own interests are served rather than the the LLM or the producers of these LLMs >> yeah that sends my mind in a different direction you having a slave that that's obviously horrific for the slave and then terrible for you as well. But the LLM is a it's a it's a different nuance on that. You're not hurting another person. But depending on the use to which you're putting the LLM like focusing on it just from the perspective of a writer or let's even more even better a student. If you have a people keep saying that you had the printing press and you had the books and you had the internet, how is this any different? Well, it's radically different because none of those things could think for you. And if you have a student who's never had to research an essay, never had to decide what to put in the essay, never had to rewrite it, never had to think through it, what is my argument, what are my points, what are my conclusion, do I know I'm right? How do I know I'm right? You're literally crippling the capacity for critical thinking. Nothing in history has ever done that before at that scale. That is the part that that there's a lot of good that that AI can do. I'm a fan of AI. But when it comes down to what it can do to stunting the human mind, that's the part that's fascinating and that's the part that I think more and more people are going to be waking up to hopefully sooner rather than later. >> Yeah, absolutely. I know it is a bit of a detour, but it's such an interesting topic and I I do think it does have that potential to by replacing thinking stunt stunt the human mind. Absolutely. >> Well, it ties into it ties into stoicism. What is what is epic to say? You ascent, you desent, you withhold judgment. How do you do that? Unless you're able to read the situation and think and if you if you're relying on an LLM to give you your argument, your reasons, and your conclusion, how are you able to even get to the point where you can ascent or descent or withhold judgment effectively? You have crippled the literally the capacity that all of stoicism is based off of, which is human reason, which is God, which is everything. That that to me is it's literally a war on reason. um if it's used in in in sort of the educational capacity we're talking about. >> Yeah, I think so. I mean there is this skill of knowing how best to use an LLM and that requires you know responding to your impressions with respect to whatever it's feeding you whatever you're and then reflecting on what you ought to ask. But I still think there is this and perhaps the analogy to other people is useful. Uh, Senica has a case in a letter where he talks about um, a man who uses his slaves as his memory and shows off his slaves uh, reciting poetry uh, and such and it sort of claims them as his own. Like I think that's a a kind of failure mode that using other people using tools can can lead you towards. >> Yeah. That that man pretty much condemns himself in every way, shape or form. >> Yes. Absolutely. So thinking about uh I think the Stoics that's influenced the most is probably Epictitus. Is that fair to say? >> Uh for me personally. >> Yeah. For you personally. >> Yeah. Yeah. 99% it would be Epictitus and the 1% would be Senica and Rufus and Marcus. >> What is that that stuck out to you about the man and his work? >> Yeah. >> Again, I don't agree with everything in the Stoic universe. Um but his passion, his energy, absolute brilliance, the way he utilizes dialogue, hypothetical syllogisms, and his intent. He could not have been nobler, more nobler than anybody else. Like Marcus Aureliuses are unique because it's it's to him. It's like, hey, >> pull back. Um be aware now. Don't don't make anything too significant. You're going to be dead soon. like standard, hey, just you're an emperor, you have a lot of power, keep that under control. And then you had Senica who, you know, extraordinarily wealth wealthy, a lot of influence. Um, his was sort of like an aristocratic playing with it. Uh, but Epictthetus was was real. He made himself the most extreme example you can. He lived on a pallet. He had a clay lamp and that was it. That was his life. He had his beard. He had his cloak. And he didn't he didn't give a damn about anything else. He made himself the most extreme example. There's no hypocrisy in that man whatsoever. Not only that, he never even called himself a stoic. He never even called himself a philosopher. Like that is the mo and and nobody else in the world ever deserved to be called a philosopher more than Epictitus. It's like just reading his words, you you get a feel for him as a human being and just how intensely passionate and aware and grateful you could you could be. Um and it ties into like the way he thinks. He himself lived extreme but he also pushed the boundaries of human thought in the most extreme manner possible. The thing on the wall behind me the door stands open. Like he literally was the first existentialist in a way and he would use this the door stands open to basically say you think that how can you think that you could be forced into doing anything into thinking anything into being anybody's slave into not having the power of choice when the door stands open hypothetically if you want to you can end your life which means you choose to be here and you choose to be a slave and you choose to be miserable. He went that full boundary between life and death to prove the to prove his point. You have choice in literally everything that happens in your entire life because you choose to exist. Once I understood he said that, I'm like, this is a a fearless thinker who will go anywhere and is absolutely unequivocally correct. You can't refute that argument. If you can't, I've never heard it. But his just his his intensity, his mercilessness, his grit, and then on top of all that, underlying all that is his his caring. He cares. He genuinely gives a damn. He's like the uh the stoic coach that's after you but for a good reason. And you know that his passion is grounded in his uh you know in who he was in his own character. It's not a not a performance. I think that comes through through Aryan's notes. Absolutely. >> No, I wonder about that too. So there's a thinker what's his name? >> Uh Dobin. So Dobin is under the impression, if I remember correctly, I don't want to misquote anybody, that Epithetus actually did write the discourses and it was just a fashionable thing to make it appear as though someone else did. And like if if I have any opinion whatsoever, I learned Greek to a basic level so I could read him in the original. That that would be epic because if you compare that writing compared to Aryens, it is it is a radically different set of writing. Now, maybe Arian was just a brilliant writer and could and literally embodied the voice of Epithetus because the form and the structure, even the type of Greek he used was different from what he typically used in his own writing. But like, how awesome would that be if this actually was Epithetus' writings and we know he wrote, he said he wrote in his in his discourses, but um that's just an interesting side thought there. Maybe it actually is his words. Who knows? >> Yeah, that's an interesting thought. I haven't dove into that. You guys should. I think that's it's totally possible that it is. At least it seems absolutely likely that I think Aryan copied his phrases to a high degree of fidelity. I think that's absolutely true. >> Yeah. Yeah. What about you? If you had to pick one of the majors, who would you pick? >> Well, Marcus Aurelius was the one who stuck out to me first. I I think it's because of his introspective nature the meditations of course and I think if you read meditations you see that there are these themes of stoicism that everyone's able to pick out focus on focusing on resilience but there's also this really grand perspective that's uh metaph you could call them metaphysical spiritual the there's you know Marcus Aurelius is always talking about God taking this view from above that I thought was really striking And that's something I've I've wrestled with in stoicism, you know, the stoic idea of God, how that fits into everything. What first attracted me to philosophy was these debates, sort of traditional debates about the existence of God. So um perhaps it's tied to that as well, but you have this picture of a man trying to do his best to live the stoic life and he's informed by both the you get the sense he's informed by both the micro and the macro as it were those two aspects of you know day-to-day overcoming temptations for a particular kind of food reminding himself that it's a corpse while also thinking of you know I'm imbued with the same reason as the divine divine reason that you know grounds all things. So I I think that's uh that's my answer. >> I've never got to talk to anybody about this. I'm very curious to hear what you think about it. Like Epicus is self-evident in the respect that he literally lived his philosophy. Arguably Senica did not a lot, though he certainly died his philosophy. And then Marcus is interesting. Um you have a guy who's literally an emperor literally waging war on an entire indigenous population like the Germanic tribes. And at the same time, he's coming back to his tent at night and writing these very calm meditations about what are you grasping for? Why aren't you just being present in the moment? Realize you're going to be die you're going to die soon. What's what's the point? How do you when you think about him as a man on top of his philosophy, not just the beauty of his philosophy? How do you how do you reconcile those two things? >> Yeah, it's uh it's interesting. I think there's also the additional complication with his letters where I think he seems much more personal in his letters to his tutor Franto and almost more um mundane, you know, talking about he's they're not high flowing discussions of philosophy even though I'm sure they they had them. Um, but I think it's it's always so hard to tease out who Marcus Aurelius was uh as a man. But I do think the general historical consensus that he was someone of upright character, a very serious person. He was picked out from a young age for the role and uh was thought well of by Hrien of course, but also Antonius Pas. Um, I think that speaks to him as someone who certainly had views, political views that would have been uh in step with typical Roman views about Germanic tribes and such. Um, but uh did have a kind of seriousness probably earnestness uh to him that was not evident in other emperors to say nothing of other other Romans. >> Yeah. just the the history of stoicism fascinating in and of itself for that reason. You have Epictitus, a dirt poor slave, and you have Marcus Aurelius, the emperor. Um it's uh it's fun to unriddle that and how that impacts them in different ways. That's why stoicism is fascinating. There there really is no one stoicism. Everybody kind of took it and did something different with it over time. >> Um which which makes sense. It has adapted with the times. I mean, it was adapted from the Greek to the Roman. In the Greek world, it was almost a withdrawal. And the Romans realized that in order to have a highly functioning essentially a state at scale, you need to make sure there's a sense of duty. You can't just withdraw into yourself. You have to have a duty for the body politic. So, it's cool to see that shift and then now it's having its own shift in this sort of renaissance of stoicism in the 21st century. Uh, God only knows what will happen to it in a couple decades, but it's kind of cool to watch. >> Yeah, I think so. I think that's connected to this idea of I don't know how much you've thought about stoic role ethics but Epictitus is certainly large on this this idea that you can get a sense of your duties out of other stoics. He doesn't talk about virtue as much. >> Um but you can get a sense of your duties from the roles you occupy in your life or that's a neighbor, father, uh today we'd say maybe an employee, citizen, what have you. And um these roles are going to be different from society to society time to time. So I do think it has that a kind of adaptiveness to the philosophy that is I I think I I think is just realistic really for making sense of the world. There are so many different kinds of people and situations that uh perhaps other philosophies that aims to make more general rules, universal rules and such are going to not work as well. Yeah, he he definitely did not almost ever mention virtue. He was so common sensical and so focused on just hey live a good life, be a good person. And even though he never said the word virtue, he makes it really clear what that means. >> I think it is significant he doesn't say virtue. Um the virtue is interesting and like that that word that word gets used a lot today and I almost wonder if it was used a lot in his day. I almost wonder if he deliberately avoided it because he knew what difficult situations could demand of you. I don't I'm just kind of riffing on it. Like coming from a combat perspective, a an ethicist would not make it 2 seconds. Like in in the reality outside of the Western world, virtue takes on a totally different meaning. And to go in there with one set idea on what the right is very quickly goes out the window. And I almost wonder if that's why Epictthetus didn't go down the road of be becoming a moralist in the sense of like this is exactly how you ought to live. He was more pulling back the shades of to show you what not to do, which kind of leaves you with a broad path of what to do to be a decent person, live a good life. I almost wonder if that's what's going on there. But that's something I want to now think on for a couple days because uh maybe there's something there. I don't know. >> Yeah, I think that's that's interesting. there's um I think on on one hand you don't get sort of detailed universal prescriptions or condemnations about perhaps more controversial questions that you might get from you know like I think about Masonius Rufus he he advises he has some more specific recommendations about what people should do he's sort of an early pronatalist I don't think Epictitus makes those kinds I could forgetting some. Um, but I don't think he makes that level of prescription. You know, everyone should have children or something of that sort. I mean, in that specific case, I don't think he had any biological children. Um, >> he didn't. He actually got mocked for that at one point cuz he kept telling everybody have children. And one of the uh interlockers said, "Sure, I'll marry your daughter." [Music] Um uh he does he does of course admire a number of figures who took difficult uncompromising stances of course. So I think about egropinus who wouldn't kneel before Nero in a variety of spectacles and of course he praises other senators resisting the demands of tyrants. So I think that's it's important to I think stoicism has at once it has a kind of flexibility of being able to adapt to different cultures but at the same time it also has this idea of you know once you've identified an exemplar and specific situation that's what you need to attain now and that's not going to be it's not going to be easy and may very well be uh on the extreme side of things. >> Yeah he made that clear. I mean he always he talked about Socrates a lot. He talked about Hercules a lot and he talked about people who did not meet a good end a lot. I think that was a strategic choice of his. Say if you prepare for the worst case, well, not only you prepared for the worst case, but then the best case is is awesome. You just you just you got lucky that you got to die a death of old age as opposed to drinking hemlock or getting beheaded or some horrible end. Uh even in that perspective as a teacher, he's exceptional. people will study his discourses just to see how did he actually so effectively teach and he had all these mechanisms these hypotheticals to he used a lot of psychotric method um he constantly inverted everything he was a brilliant teacher in and of itself and to think that he maybe did that on the fly like these are just his conversations these weren't his formal teachings the fact he could just riff like that on the fly with whoever happened to walk through his door it must have been a sight to behold to see him in action that energy and that that vibrancy I just can't even imagine what it must have felt Oh yeah. And energy, vibrancy. These are I think great great words to capture it. I think sometimes sicism people think it's I think they have a kind of cold aspect to it. Passive, not as active, but I think you you can really see the the life in someone like Epictitus. The demand I think Stoic is an energetic they're an energetic individual at at their best. So I think Epictitus is a good example of that. Sometimes reading Marcus Aurelius, you get the sense that he's been energetic all day and now he's slowing down, >> you know, reflecting. And so that's a different different pace perhaps. >> That's a that's a huge caveat. It's like we're getting especially Marcus Aurelius because it could it could feel like if you just read that straight through, it could feel like a downer. But you're you're right. That's like that's the end of the day. That's the end of the day of being an emperor. How much he had to entertain and amuse and joke and and deal with dramas. Um, I hear more and more people today, more and more people today when they really get deep into stoicism, they take it too far and they become apathetic in the worst sense, not in the good sense. They're apathetic in the sense where they almost just shut off as opposed to like the original sense of no fear. And there's there's a radical difference between the two. Like if you if you read Epictitus, I think he again he's being extreme on purpose just like Marcus Aurelius is because Epictitus is being extreme and getting the person he's talking to from ratcheting it back a little bit. Hey, focus on what you're doing here. Don't get lost in politics or something or seeking command or wealth or whatever. And Marcus Aurelius is doing that to himself. That doesn't mean that that that's all life is. It is a method and a tool. I agree with you. It's not meant to become cold like a lot of people are like maybe maybe stoicism isn't right. It's not stoicism. It's how much it's how you did it. It's meant to make life more vibrant and every second more colorful and vibrant if it's done the right way. Like if you if you read Epictitus with kind of in that mind keeping that keeping in mind you're reading it and not hearing it, that's that's all the world of the difference. I I have no doubt that if you listen to Epictitus, you would leave there with every neuron firing ready to just get the after it. Whereas if you just read it for 20 minutes straight, it could almost be like uh you just ratcheted down a little too far. Yeah, that's a good point. You've mentioned a few times that um you don't agree with all of Stoicism, which is of course uh respectable position. What sorts of things do you want to uh call out as maybe places where you're uncertain or the Stokes got it wrong as you've been thinking through the philosophy? >> Uh when you think about it as an entire philosophy, um like the the metaphysics, I I don't >> like the metaphysics. Correct. uh like the fiery breath all that stuff. I think it's a beautiful picture. I think it was an attempt at really vibrant minds of trying to go first principles. What is everything and why are we here? They they they did it in a beautiful way just like the Old Testament did it in a beautiful way just like a lot of other people have done it in a beautiful way. Do I think that's true? I don't think it's true. And then when you think about a lot of the duties that you find um you find some duties in Epithetus, you find quite a few strong recommendations in Senica. Uh I'm not able to pull them off the top of my head. Um but it's it's stuff where if you again if you take it too literally, it is taking a step back from life. It is a certain amount of withdrawal. Every time I eat a food I like, like a piece of watermelon, I don't want to remember I'm going to be dead. Or, hey, you're not always going to have this. Or, hey, this is this is too too much luxury for me, you know? I also kind of just want to enjoy it. Um, practice is essential. Is it essential to do every second of every day? I don't think so. Um, yeah, I that's a good question. I wish I could have like prepared beforehand because I took a strong stand and now I can't back it up. I'd probably pull up 30 different quotes of examples or like listen if this were part of the doctrine I wouldn't do it but the out is again there is no one stoicism senica is very different from epithetus from rufus from Marcus even though like Marcus was influenced by epictitus but yeah it's hard to just say that I'm that again in the same way I can't say I'm a democrat or republican because it comes with a lot of baggage and if you want to be a single issue thinker not just in politics but in philosophy uh I I would not want to just adopt that and and move on because there's there's aspects of existentialism I absolutely love and and believe to be true. So does that mean I if I'm a stoic can I also have existentialist beliefs? And if I'm a stoic what about the arisatilian beliefs of what it means to have a good life which is very different from what Epicus says. So I'll side with that. I'll side with Aristotle that virtue isn't just enough. It's not ne it is necessary but it's not sufficient for happiness. I do think you also need the other things in life. And if you're going to have a life of 60 70 80 years it's probably nice to have some possessions. It's nice to have a small amount of wealth. Um, it's nice to have a little bit of security, but at the same time, pressure test that with your philosophy. Practice the poverty as opposed to just being poor. Um, hopefully that gives you a good idea what I'm talking about. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I think going for the uh the claim that uh, you know, virtue is not sufficient for a good life is certainly a challenge for challenge for the stoics. This is something a lot of aspirational stoics, people interested in stoicism struggle with when they learn more about the philosophy because it is one of those radical, you know, that's what distinguishes stoicism, one of the key claims that distinguishes the Stoics from the rest of the Henistic Greco Roman philosophies and such. >> Yeah, I I I could see that in the worst case situation. Like think the Frankle situation, a concentration camp at the end as you're about to walk through the jaws of death. Can you say virtue is sufficient and necessary? Then then I think your argument is fine. But if you're not in the worst case, if you're not about to drink the hemlock like Socrates or about to walk through the gates of Awitz, um you can expand your horizons and attempt to live a a more full life as opposed to living on the absolute edge all the time. That I think is where um the the absolute stand I think again was more of a teaching mechanism than an actual practical application on how to live your day-to-day life especially in the 21st century. >> Mhm. Yeah. So the the connection to existentialism is interesting. I do think there's that a strong commonality and both philosophies take freedom seriously. They say we are more free than other philosophies. Perhaps common sense dictates we are we're more responsible for our thoughts, actions and such. So I do think there's a real similarity on that front though of course there are significant differences when it comes to the ultimate grounding of value and and such. >> Yeah. The freedom is like the foundation of it. Well, death, death and freedom are the foundations of um of existentialism. And then not surprising, that's a major aspect of Epictitus. The the the good part about stoicism is that they do give you a bit more than the existentialists. Like the depending on which existentialist you're talking about, their primary focus is on um you you know you're going to die. You're born inherently free. You have to make up your own mind. And the universe is inherently meaninglessness. It's inherently meaningless. Like it is a super dark message. And the whole point is now what? Now you got to do something with it. And the whole goal of of existentialism or depending on who which teacher you you listen to is the goal is authenticity. So how do you be your own human being completely of your own valition uninfluenced by what nature would call the herd. So like don't adopt what the collective is doing. actually take a step back, acknowledge you exist, lean into what they would call existential anxiety, and then make your own path forward owning that anxiety instead of just running in terror from the fact you're going to die. What is that if not stoicism? What is that if not practicing death? Because if you can master that, you're now here. You're now grounded. You're like this slab of being who've just owned your existence. And now you can move forward without being compelled, without doing it through fear or anxiety or deliluding yourself. So, I think that they're super super linked even though they're very different. I just think essentialism is more I see it as more of a destructive philosophy than stoicism which both breaks you down and then tries to build you back up. Yeah. I suppose they get to the same place with facing death. You have the ability to choose. And then the stoics say now choose in accordance with nature >> or some something to that effect. You know, choose in accordance with the classical virtues, your roles. Whereas it depends existentialism many different existentialists and it's perhaps even a wider tent than the stoic uh one but they don't perhaps don't offer the same kind of guidance. It's no you just have choice and now choose. >> Yeah. There's no living in accordance with nature with them because to them the universe is inherently meaningless. Like I actually don't believe that. Like to a certain extent I do from a scientific extent. Yeah. That's a bunch of atoms and and star matter. But at the same time, we we are meaning creating creatures and the only way you do that is by engaging with your world. It's like that's something I haven't figured out. Neither did they. Sroy couldn't be more dark about it. Um life is miserable and wretched and the universe doesn't mean anything. Good luck. I I don't buy that. Um I I I like kind of the mixture of of the two and seeing the beauty. Like I could look at the trees outside. That doesn't look meaningless to me. Is it technically just inanimate matter? Sure. But that's not how we exist. If it is, we could all just go lights out and be done with this whole thing. There's meaning out there and we have to find it. And that's something I that's actually something I love writing about on my substack. >> There is no definitive answer on that yet. And that's something you could riff on all day and try to find that meaning where others say it just it simply can't exist. >> Yep. Well, one thinker you wrote about recently, a contemporary of Sartra is Ernst Younger. >> Yeah. >> Very fascinating figure, fascinating man. Not as well known perhaps, I think, to our listeners. So, I don't know if you could say some words about his his biography or, you know, what's what's uh the most salient parts to you. >> Uh he was well educated as a kid. um was an joined the French Foreign Legion of his own valition as a teenager. When World War I happened, he became a commissioned officer in the German army. Um he went all the way through World War I. Absolutely incredible war record, like an an absolute war hero in every sense of the word. Um and we we can go back into that. Uh when that was done, he leaned heavy into his philosophical beliefs. um a lot of which were shaped in combat. Um he became an entomologist I believe. So he studied ants >> and like he had an opportunity uh in the early Hitler era like he was a he was a German hero. Hitler admired this guy. He he had nothing he wanted nothing to do with Nazis. Um so he was given some highranking post in Paris during World War II. And then when that was done because he he kind of never really got involved in Nazi stuff, he finished out his days as a writer. But it he he's he's hard for me to grasp. It's like I don't He wrote a lot of books. Some of them are super abstract and like I I go through 120 pages like what what did he just say? But but then he he fascillates between that super abstract and then the super concrete. And when you read Storm of Steel, especially I don't know if you have like uh combat veterans out there, but the guys who've been to war, he he becomes a phenomenologist of war, but he does it from like a poet, philosopher's perspective. So he's not just, hey, this is terrible. A lot of World War I memoirs are of absolute horrific wretchedness. There was no more bloody or destructive war in human history. It was it was brutal. But if you read it from Younger's perspective, it was a work of poetry in the in the best and the worst sense. Not that he was glorifying it. Like he wholeheartedly admitted just how bad it was. And he became fascinated because that was the first like truly mechanized industrial warfare. And he was fascinated that we are these flesh and blood beings doing a metal war. So he would look at a human being compared to a tank and a human being compared to a machine gun and a human being compared to a mortar or a rocket and it you could tell his fascination of the fact that we created war. War also created us every aspect of our minds and our bodies. And then when he would look at it in the war in war um especially trench warfare his writing going trench to trench is like it it is out of this world. Um, I would not have liked to to meet him in no man's land. Um, he you could tell he's fascinated that despite how destructive this is and how little you can do about a complete mortar barrage that could just disintegrate you, he was still fascinated that the human can endure and thrive in that environment. So it could be so bad that he's curled up in the fetal position and the mortars are coming so intense like more than anything any any of us could possibly imagine to the point where all you hear is one continuous noise, not individual explosions. And he's being bounced on the ground and all he could do is just start laughing. That's it. There's nothing left to do but laugh because of how completely ridiculous the situation is and outside of his control. And many people literally went insane in that situation. the fact he didn't was a testament to his mental strength and how he viewed it and how he viewed the strength of of the human being. And uh so he would riff on that again and again and again just walking through his experiences and describing the world with all five senses and then every now and then he would inject a sort of philosophical reference that blows your mind like how did you how in the middle of this did you maintain your sanity and then find something beautiful about the human condition. So, I just went on a while, so you can go wherever you want with that one. But he is a he is a fascinating man. >> Yeah, he's absolutely I think absolutely fascinating. The Storm of Steel, that's his record of his experience in World War I. Some listeners might know about the Battle of the Psalm, a month-long battle, uh month, I should say, monthsl long battle, really terrible trench warfare. Many famous figures of the time were there. CS Lewis, J.R. Tolken um Robert Graves and uh I think he he has this uh afterwards he he becomes a war hero as you said and he's always had a um perhaps like Senica in some ways he's had a reputation of at once a hero a kind of sage but also a moral morally ambivalent figure either because of his politics because he didn't resist the Nazis enough even you know I think he He there's accounts of him uh protecting people in Paris, protecting Jews in Paris, but there's he didn't take perhaps the strong stand others expected of him at the time. So, it's always a very difficult man to judge. He lived almost a century. The man lived almost the entire 20th century, >> which doesn't make sense given how many times he was shot, blown up, and how much he smoked. Like, you just you have good jeans or something that that's that's remarkable. He was also cast too. Let's not forget that. >> I think went through some of the most pivotal moments of course and in both both halves of the of the century. Some of his later works are on uh introspection. You sort of wrote his version of the doors of perception almost. It's a a book called approaches uh about psychedelics psychedelic experience broadly not just not just drugfused. a very interesting work that's difficult to go through as you say he's uh parts of it read smoothly. It's a kind of almost is is very imagistic sort of picturesque writer and it's very uh easy to pick up for a while and then at some point you would think it's become a bit murky and abstract as you say. >> Yeah, he wasn't afraid to try out new thoughts. That's for sure. How would you uh I think something that I've noticed in terms of a connection to stoicism, especially as connected to war, he has a striking passage where he notes the behavior of some of his comrades, furious at the fact that I believe the British killed one of their friends, one of their their brothers in arms and held nothing but hatred in their heart for the British. He notes that they didn't understand the objective nature of war, which in a way sounds cold, but in another way seems totally correct. I don't know how you connect to that passage, but he does have these kinds of passages where he it seemed like he was able to see war as a less than personal things uh in comparison with other people who of course see it as a deeply >> is the example you're talking about. So he was So younger was talking about members of the German army being upset that the British killed a German soldier. >> Yeah. Absolutely. >> Yeah. So that's something you get from his writing is his respect for the enemy. Like he he never talks about hatred. Even in the middle of a firefight, he writes about one of his last great battles, the one where he was shot and pretty much almost had his end. I mean, he was shot multiple times. This was the one that was the one that almost took him out. Uh he he was talking about going trench to trench and he was just talking about how this enemy machine gunner uh I think there was a group of three of them. He saw two of them run away and one man stayed on the enemy machine gun and he just kind of paused and just admired like what a hard man. Like this is a worthy enemy. This is someone that I can respect even though this guy had a machine gun trying to kill him. That is that's not normal. like so he's not a certainly not a normal combatant, but he he he did stay objective on that. To him, it was all business. He even wrote about during the same battle. Uh he remembered shooting uh one of the the Scottish Highlanders. Uh he got a letter from that Scottish Highlander after the war when that Scottish Highlander read the book and said, "Hey, that was me. Like you shot me." And they they were pen pals. It's like he he had this elevated mindset where he was always above the fray. And it's again, it's not normal. Typically, you're either an abstract thinker, a philosophical, introspective, thoughtful human being, or you're the executor. Almost never do you get the same person who could flick that switch and become one of those between in a very short period of time. It's it's exceptionally difficult. And then even more rarely can you be both at the same time. >> And I get the impression he was actually both at the same time. That could just be the way he wrote after the fact, but you almost get the impression as he was doing the trenchto trench warfare, he was still elevated above the fray. He was still able to be both aggressive and lob the grenades and throw the machine guns and then while doing that admire the courage of an enemy trying to kill him until he could flank and kill that enemy. Um, that's that's why reading his work kind of certain parts of his work where he's kind of in the in the zone and and less abstract. You read that and then I kind of look up and I I look at the world in a different way because he he flowed with it. He literally flowed with the good and the bad almost as a form of poetry. He even said the task is life but the adventure is poetry. It's like he he he saw that the mundane concrete execution of each task as taking place in a poetic context at all times. That's a way to live. Maybe that's why he made it to 100 because he was just stimulated and he loved it the whole time. But that's the vibe I get. And and your point about respecting the enemy is I think fundamental to to who he is. So if if people want to judge him for not going too hard against the Nazis, I'd be I'd be wary of me casting a moral judgment like that until you've ever been tested in the same way. Like he he was an exceptional human being. He did stay away from morals. He was deliberately morally ambiguous because he was so tutored in war. Again, it it kind of changes your perspective on what what things should be when you realize just how bad it can get. And uh you know, if you want just coming down to good and evil. I mean, sometimes to defeat the evil, you need to do things that don't meet the virtuous life as defined by philosophical influencers, for example. It's not happening. We wouldn't be here if that were the case. Um, so like that that adds a whole curveball that it's funny too like in philosophy it's kind of changed over time. Philosophy used to be the domain of people who lived in in the real world and interacted with the real world. Socrates was a combat veteran before a philosopher. Um, philosophy now has become more of a profession um that has become a way of life. And I think it's been divorced from the reality of just how bad things can get. And when you kind of academicize philosophy, it's easy to come up with this just outrageous moral judgment of the world on how a thing should be that very quickly very quickly go out the window the second uh our co is taken away. >> Mhm. Yeah. Certainly we've become more specialized not just in the philosophical domain but in our careers as well and perhaps even interests. and Socrates younger or so I think counter examples to that you know you had the man who lift he's almost at one point he seems like the ultimate masculine hero and then he's but he's also interested in studies insects and then he's curious about you know exploring the bounds of consciousness so he sounds like he sounds like a hippie but then if you read his other works like no this is this man is no no hippie at all he's uh uh almost like an old German aristocrat really uh but but an adventurous one. Um >> yeah, >> think of for sure. I mean he he >> he also the hippie is interesting like and I know what you mean like the last person you'd think would be sort of hippish, but he kind of was in a way. Like he equated a lot of the horror of World War I and World War II, this industrialized mechanized warfare with the economic system we invented. So, he's almost like an early postmodernist in a sense. He's like, "Listen, this world is getting beyond us. We're becoming cogs in this world. And guess what happens when you make people into cogs? You treat them like cogs. You put them on a battlefield and you you you butcher them needlessly." Um, so they Yeah, he thought he saw things originally. I think he saw them ahead of his time. Uh, I still think he did. And, uh, I just admire his ability to go from ants to warfare to psychedelics. It's pretty powerful. >> Have you read any of his novels? I read The Glass Bees and I have not read the other ones. I I read The Glass Bees and I I didn't think I could do any more of his fiction. It did not strike me as deeply as his his non-fiction. Yeah, some of his I think I've tried a few of them. I did really enjoy I did enjoy On the Marble Cliffs and there's a recent relatively recent new translation of it that I think I can't speak to its accuracy by any means, but I thought read very well. >> I got to check it out. I have to check it out. Yeah. So um and I I think you get at least it was easier to me to see there's the same man who wrote that and Storm of Steel and his philosophical essays of his that I've read then I you know I've tried the glass beads Yumesfield I believe as a name of his other novels and those were harder for me to to sink my teeth into as it were. >> Yeah, he wasn't shy about experimenting with writing styles and techniques and ideas. Um, that's why it's it's super hit or miss. And I I stay close to I stay close to Storm of Steel. Um, what was the other one he had? Uh, the other one that was super striking was an elaboration on the last battle, Fire and Blood. Super gentle title, but like he gets a little bit deeper in that last firefight where he got shot in the chest. Um, and uh, yeah, the philosophical musings he injects into the middle of that horror. It's incredible stuff. >> Yep. And you could rec work worth mentioning I suppose is his diaries from his time in Paris. Also quite readable. >> Nice. Nice. >> Um awesome. Well, anything else you want to touch on? >> Um no, that's awesome. That's awesome. Uh um I genuinely appreciate it. Uh it's been a good time. Um what about you? Anything else you want to cover? >> I don't think so. Where can people find your uh stuff? >> Uh what then? like what then.org what then Epithetus when he was interrogating his students would say tun in Greek that means so what or what then so I named my substack after that what then.org or um you mentioned Zeriz. Zerise is my company. Uh we're an AI company trying to stop gun violence in America so we could detect guns. Uh we're we're you know detecting guns outside elementary schools, subway platforms, grocery stores, etc. You name it. Uh that's been a good mission and every week we're getting guns where they shouldn't be. Um so yeah, those two things are it. >> Perfect. I've enjoyed this. Thanks so much for coming on. Thanks for listening to Sto Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at Stoa Stoaitation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
