---
title: "Stoicism & Anger w/ Donald Robertson"
slug: stoicism-anger-w-donald-robertson
youtube_id: 2AkbqSDcOLc
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2AkbqSDcOLc
upload_date: 2025-09-18
duration: 1:14:14
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

And so, um, today's topic, we're going to be talking about stoicism and anger. We were chatting a bit before we went live. Um, why this topic? What's what's the appeal for you? I just think it's one of the most interesting subjects. Like we were saying earlier, I specialized for many years in anxiety disorders, and anxiety and anger are kind of quite closely related in some ways. So, I wanted to start researching and working on something else. And I thought I'd always thought anger was kind of intriguing. It's quite a colorful and interesting emotion. Um I think I'd rather work with anger for example than be a bereavement counselor or something like that. Like and it's a problem that I had when I was a young guy. Like I had a lot of anger and I had to kind of work on it myself a long time ago. So I think it was that was one of the reasons. And another reason which we'll probably touch on is it's one of the most it's one of the emotions that has the biggest impact I mean to massively simplify things you know genocide is committed in part because of anger bombs are dropped like you know civilizations have been laid to waste you know because of anger or a more personal level marriages are destroyed children are traumatized because of anger like you know it potentially has more of a social and interpersonal impact, you know, and we see it all all around us all the time. In some ways, anger is the most another reason actually is that anger in some regards is one of the most neglected emotions. We said earlier there's a lot more research on depression and anxiety. Although we do know a lot about anger, we know far more about anger than most people realize, but it's still it's relatively neglected and yet it's everywhere. You know, where would you go to find anger, guys, if you wanted to look for it? >> The the grocery store driving. >> I go to I go and look on Twitter. Like, it's uh US politics is I think it's fair to say like I can't turn on my TV without being confronted by a lot of outrage and anger and division and all that kind of stuff. And I think everybody is a bit sick of it to be honest, you know, like I think most people think it's obviously a big big problem. And do you know what people are doing about it? Every day it gets like a bigger thing. It's in your faces. What do we do about it? Make it worse. Nobody does anything about it. >> Virt virtually nothing. Like it just gets stoked every day. like this Charlie Kirk thing like the way that politicians are responding to it and the way the media are responding to it is almost kind of designed just to kind of stoke more outrage and conflict and stuff like that. there's like not no hint of any real effort to kind of damp things down like so it's the complete opposite really and there might be political historical reasons for why things have ended up in that mess but that's a reason you know um I I wanted to say as well we were saying off air there are some things that psychotherapy is not that great at treating um and then there's other things it has a much higher success rate for And anger actually has a kind of moderately high success rate, right? And has done really since records began of like measuring outcomes in psychotherapy. So we know quite a lot about what works and what doesn't and you know it's definitely something we can help people with like so that's that's that's inspiring in a way that's motivating and reassuring. We're not just kind of banging our heads against a wall here like we've known for a long time we can actually do stuff about it. Well, I'll tell you about one of my my my most f one of my most favorite controversial research studies. >> There was a study done in >> let's also let's also get into what we what we're talking about when we talk about anger. You know like what's the stoic conception? The stoic conception of anger is surprisingly similar to uh the definite like in the ancient world it had a like it may come first of all first of all a caveat it might shock many people to realize that psychotherapy existed in the ancient world you know many people think that segment Freud invented psychotherapy which is you know completely wrong on several levels Freud himself studied psychotherapy psychotherapy in its modern form had been around for at least half a century before Freud even appeared on the scene. But psychotherapy existed in the ancient world. They called it therapy of the psyche and there are many references to it. It was like a branch of philosophy. Entire books were dedicated to it. Most of them are lost unless you count on anger by Senica which could be classified as an entire book on stoic psychotherapy for anger basically. And we have examples of the stoic consolation letters and Plutarch's consolation letters and and stuff like that as well. But what I was going to say in the ancient world the Stoics were the sector of philosophers most associated with psychotherapy. They aligned themselves most with it. But all the other schools dabbled in it to some extent. And not only did they have um psychotherapy practices, but they had a theory of psychopathology. They had a theory of cause and cure. And uh so the Stoics had the definition of anger which is anger is the desire for revenge. And that definition is stunningly similar to the definition of every other school of ancient philosophy as far as I'm aware. The Plleonists have a similar definition. Uh the Aristilians have a pretty similar definition. Like we find it cropping up in other kind of more obscure philosophers. You know, I think pretty much all of them share the similar definition. And one interesting thing about that, we're kind of touching on another deeper, wider subject here, which is that some people might today think that's a surprising definition of anger. That is isn't, you know, the go-to for most people today. Um although there's actually some research that's surprisingly consistent that desire for revenge is a recurring qualitative research that shows it's a common theme like in studies on the subjective experience of anger even today. So it's kind of neglected in modern research uh as a component of anger. Um there are reasons for that but there's a bigger point I want to make here which is and it's a probably a good point to make at the beginning. Um when you start talking about anger and you start kind of challenging it and stuff like that there's something that changes the game, you know, which I found and other researchers have found the same experience which is most people have a kind of died in the wool conception of anger and its role in psychology and its role in society. We have a folk psychology of anger which you know shock horror might be wrong you know like so by folk psychology that's what philosophers and psychologists call everybody's default assumptions about how certain things work how emotions work how the mind works you know and generally speaking it's not great like you know we haven't spent a lot of time refining it like this you know that it could be said to contain certain uh flaws or oversimplifications or mistakes But it's quite ingrained like so most people you know in the very language that we use when we talk about anger we you know we have quite entrenched opinions about what it is what function it might perform the kind of pros and cons of it. But something that immediately challenges that that people don't often think about is that crosscultural research on the emotions tends to show that people experience anger quite differently in different cultures. Now I mentioned that because you asked me what the story definition was and I said it might seem a little bit odd. It's a little bit slightly off in some ways to modern Americans and Brits and so on, Canadians. Um, but that's because the ancient world would be an example of another culture where people did anger slightly differently. And what cross-cultural research does once people start looking at it, it actually tends to introduce more cognitive flexibility, which is a good thing. Like so people start to think maybe all my assumptions about anger are a little bit arbitrary, you know, like maybe, you know, maybe anger could function differently or be viewed differently, you know, or maybe it could be uh experienced differently because people in indigenous cultures, for example, often have a more negative view of anger, see it as more unhealthy. The Buddhists and Stoics traditionally thought all anger was unhealthy, which is quite different from the way that we view it today. And I would even go as far as to say to shock horror that Americans have a slightly different set of assumptions about anger than perhaps Brits and Canadians and other people in in the Western world. And I think there are modern historical reasons for that which we maybe we can delve into like in the political history of the US that shape certain attitudes that people have towards anger. But for obviously in eastern cultures there tends to be a more negative view about anger and people experience it in a slightly different way. Um and so it shouldn't be a surprise when we look at the ancient world to discover that they see it as uh from a a slightly different lens. Although, you know, like I say, there are things that we can definitely recognize. Most people might say, well, maybe desire for revenge is a kind of factor in it. You know, I I should explain one reason why that's different. There's a whole long story here, but his historically in terms of the cultural history, we tend to suppress anger a lot more uh perhaps than some people did in the ancient world. And uh particularly women, there's a huge gender difference in the way that people experience anger. Uh men are more likely to exhibit verbal aggression. Displays of physical aggression are relatively rare, funnily enough, in western society and anger. Like this is a big problem. It's too common. Like but it's not how people normally manifest their anger. Like what people normally do is they'll snap at people and be a bit rude to them. you know, they'll maybe be passive aggressive like which in in some ways being passive aggressive is a more serious problem. You know, it's the insidious face of anger. You know, it's like I'm not just going to snap at you and call you bad names, but you know, if I'm your boss at work and I I have a a burning resentment towards you. I might sabotage you for the next decade, you know, of your life and you know, make a life hell without you even realizing it. So, in some ways, passive aggressive behavior is actually more sinister and could be more damaging in in certain regards. Um, but women often, the research shows tend to internalize a anger more than men. So, they'll suppress it a bit more or they'll ruminate a little bit more. And sometimes where the desire for revenge actually comes out isn't so much challenging people to a duel, right? That tends not to happen as often these days or running someone through with your spear like in the Bronze Age or whatever, but people fantasize about revenge. They go, I wish I'd said this and humiliated that guy. It's often uh social damage to social status. I wish I'd taught that guy a lesson, taking them down a peg or two, you know, giving them a piece of my mind or, you know, fantasizing about getting back, payback, getting back at people in other ways. But there are we there are different types of anger. So, as we were talking, we'll maybe distinguish between a few subtypes. So, desire for revenge is how the Stoics conceptualize it. And then so I mean my question is you know what is revenge in that case? I mean is that just getting somebody back? Is that just hurting somebody? Is that >> um you know an eye for an eye? So that's my question is what is revenge? And then you said it's surprising. I think I'm so steeped in the stoic way of thinking about it that it's like that that I have that I see that same definition. How do you think other people think about it >> um today that maybe makes that definition surprising? I think people view it less in terms of the desire for revenge, but if they kind of reflect on it, I think it again partly because of the tendency to suppress like overt displays of aggression and deny it to some extent. So people well let's go okay let's approach it this way. Maybe a good place to start is what do people typically believe? What is the folk psychology of anger? Right? So the folk psychology of anger I love because it's kind of stupid, right? But and it's kind of what everybody believes and even like I and everybody we all think in terms of uh this model because it's kind of baked into our language. It's the default view of emotions. So people tend to think of anger as if it's a kind of force or energy. Like I tend to say that most people assume a hydraulic model of emotion like it's like water pressure building up or something like that. It's like a force that builds up within them and they tend to compartmentalize faculties of the mind. So most people think they've got reason over ear and then they've got their desires and emotions over there and this anger is building up and their rational mind is observing it thinking oh like how am I going to control that? That's why we get books on controlling anger, anger management and stuff like that. >> So this is baked into the idea that the you know there's a part of us kind of platonically influenced compartmentalizing um or partitioning of the mind. So we think reason is kind of observing this feeling building up in us and then what do we do with it? It gets vented in the form of aggression and we kind of get it out of our system like releasing the pressure like letting off some steam. There's places you can go to hire a baseball bat, right? And you smash up a lot of crockery and all that. I'm sure you've seen that kind of thing. And there are whole therapies in the 60s built around that where people would go in a parking lot with a baseball bat and hit a pillow like and this kind of stuff cathartic or venting or abactive therapy or all the different names for it. Um, and some people think that this buildup of energy you could also push down or kind of suppress somehow or you could channel it into going and pumping things in the gym like you could go and work out and do something kind of constructive with it. And that's a very simplistic model. So a couple of problems with that view of anger are number one that these strategies don't actually work right. So uh there are many many coping strategies or techniques if you like studied in the field of psychotherapy and stress management and the one that has the most checkered history out of them all perhaps is venting or catharsis and particularly in relation to anger. It's been studied over and over again and consistently the research tends to show that venting anger doesn't purge it out of your system like you're letting out steam and in some cases it actually makes it worse, right? Um and so there's something deeply like so fundamentally people think I've got this buildup of anger. If I could just get it off my chest, you know, then I'd feel better. But doing that in some cases actually seems to be counterproductive. And so potentially channeling it into activity at the gym, depending what you mean by that, like if what you mean is going to the gym and kind of ruminating about the thing, all the things that pissed you off and using that to kind of get you motivated and focused and producing more adrenaline, that might just be reinforcing your anger, unfortunately, right? So you're going to become more That's why, you know, cuz if cathosis worked, um the movie Raging Bull would be pretty boring. um what's his name? Uh Tyson. Mike Tyson would be a big cuddly bunny rabbit of a guy. Like you know without you know he'd be the chillst guy. He'd be like Bob Marley to talk to right. Um but actually research shows that often people who engage in violent sports or kind of like violent activities often have higher baseline levels of anger and aggression. Maybe some exceptions to that like maybe some martial artists like experience it differently. Um but venting doesn't seem to work that well as a way of coping with anger. So one reason for that would be that anger isn't just like a blob of energy or a force that builds up within you. It's a combin reason and the emotions aren't two separate things like no modern uh neuroscience kind of views the mind in in such a kind of compartmentalized and simplistic way. So the mind uh is much more integrated than that than was previously assumed and reason and emotion are very closely intertwined. And so when people get angry, as Albert Ellis, the founder of cognitive therapy, used to say, they don't just feel angry, they also think angry. Like they have angry thoughts, beliefs, and attitudes. And so when Andrew Tate for example or Jordan Peterson like advised their followers to kind of channel their anger like and going to the gym and stuff like that. Um, what it might do is kind of burn off the adrenaline, right, or distract them temporarily, at least they're doing something positive. But it does absolutely nada potentially to change the underlying beliefs, attitudes, and values that made them susceptible to losing their temper in the first place. So if you have a sense of entitlement for example and you ask a girl out on a date to take John Peterson's example and she rejects you right then going to the gym inventing that anger channeling it into something constructive is going to not really do anything to change your sense of entitlement like it's not going to prevent you from getting angry again when the same thing happens in the future. It would be better like to think of anger not just as this kind of welling up of energy but to think of it more in terms uh more in more holistic terms and in particularly in terms of the underlying attitudes and beliefs that made you angry. >> Yeah, I think this is related to one of the misconceptions people have about stoicism. Many stoics perhaps as well where they see this division between reason and emotion and think oh what's stoicism about? It's about prioritizing reason that aspect of yourself over >> and that leads them to think it's kind of about suppressing emotions or eliminating them or something like that. But the the stoics that's because the Platonic theory of the mind which carves it into three parts in a sense was so influent Freud in a way resurrected a model that was kind of influenced by that. But this idea that the mind can be divided into faculties or or parts um was rejected by the Stoics um you know it was fundamental to their opposition to the the Platonic school of philosophy and it's also after Freud first of all a lot of Freud's own followers started to question uh his theory of mind they thought it was compartmentalizing things and fragmenting the mind too much Um so even many of the psychoanalytic theorists started to question this. And then you have the Gestalt psychotherapists who completely rejected that and you know really focused on introducing a much more holistic uh model of the mind and the phenomenologists and existential theorists in psychology that thought it was really important to introduce this more kind of unified holistic understanding of the mind. Um there are many problems with viewing the mind in this way but it kind of creates this weird situation where people think of reason as being struggling against this other part of them like where the anger is rather than thinking as Ellis said you know maybe your anger has to do with the way that you're reasoning and the beliefs that you've got and your style of thinking you're you're doing angry thinking have angry beliefs right if you think anger is like this feeling that wells up over there you're completely ignoring that fact have a blind spot for it and it creates this illusion that people feel like they're observing their anger from a kind of distance in a way and they're kind of like like Plato compared it to a charioteer controlling uh two horses, right? So the charioteer is like completely rational and the horses are kind of wild and he's trying to keep control over them and so people think of anger management like or emotional self regulation and so on in that way that's the model that they use but actually the charioter the stoics would say the charioteer is angry >> like anger pervades your entire psyche it's a way of it's a whole way of being in the world um the stoic passions aren't things that happen in a corner of the mind, their states of being, like, you know, they're they're states of the mind as a whole. Um, and that means, you know, they corrupt our uh ability to reason. We're not thinking clearly um when we're angry. And that's actually at the root of many of the practical problems and misunderstandings that people are wrestling with because they think they are thinking clearly and they tend to underestimate the extent to which anger is clouding their judgment and biasing their thinking. Well, so what um that all makes a lot of sense to me and and I agree. Um what are so somebody that's angry is not just somebody who's doing a poor job managing it or not somebody who has a stronger, you know, irrational part of the soul and somebody else they there's somebody who thinks differently. Um what are kind of the >> what are the angry thoughts or what are the angry ways of thinking? I'm assuming when you're doing then >> I'm glad you asked. >> Yeah. when you're doing therapy, you're trying to intervene on those patterns. Um, so what are those patterns? >> What are they? That's a really good question, right? Because people could be looking out for them a little bit. >> So you could call it I think of it as the cognitive architecture of anger basically. So there's more than one thing and actually I'll give a bit of a shout out to the Stoics because let's do let's do a little bit of a deep dive. There's kind of two stages to this answer. The Stoics and other ancient philosophers said that anger is a desire for revenge. Now that implies that it's a response to something, right? Um, which is again not quite how people tend to conceptualize it today. And the stories are pretty clear that it's a response to a perceived injury. And typically, Senica says it's an injury to your perceived social status. So you feel like someone's putting you down or disrespecting you in most cases, although there are other types of anger, right? So that suggests there's actually two emotions. There's an initial feeling of getting hurt in the fields or getting anxious or feeling ashamed. there's a a not nice feeling like and then anger is a secondary emotion that in some ways shock horror might actually be more like a coping strategy than a primary emotion like and so actually in many clinicians would say it's quite useful you know to rip up the another part of the way that we normally think of anger and start to think of anger less as an emotion more as a coping strategy. It's a way of dealing with the preceding emotion. That's actually one of the most fruitful. I'll give you a little anecdote about that. Aaron T. Beck, the founder of cognitive therapy, said that in virtually every client that he worked with, he he got to monitor. He said most of them uh a lot of them at first said that they weren't aware of their anger being a response to a preceding emotion. But Beck used to train people to scrutinize their experience and record it meticulously, observing, looking out for the initial automatic thoughts that preceded the emotion. And he said when he did that, virtually all of his clients reported back that they noticed there was a preceding emotion that anger was responding to. Now, I'll be blunt about it. Okay, bit I'll give you a kind of bit of a spoiler. I suppose you could say, well, what sort of emotional coping strategy is anger? Um, well, it's a fairly safe bet that it's a form of avoidance, right? So, you could also conceptualize anger very simplistically, kind of like a distraction technique in a way, right? It's a way that we distract ourselves and avoid experiencing um an initial painful emotion in many cases. And the ancient stoics were seem to be very aware of that. It's a desire for revenge in response to an initial sense of injury as they describe it. And Marcus Aurelius says when he's talking about anger, if you remove the initial in injury, then the anger would go away. Now, that's interesting because now he's thinking about which cognitions are upstream and which ones are downstream. You know, he's thinking uh more strategically like a a clinician might today. >> Yeah. So the there's this idea of um you've been harmed, but the difference between an angry person and not angry person is maybe maybe that Marcus is like the amount of harm you perceive. >> Uh if someone who if someone who's constantly seeing themselves as being harmed is probably going to have more reasons to be angry. And then another point then is is how you respond to that harm. So you know, do you require revenge? Do you attribute it to well that person deserves to be punished for what they did? Yes. Um instead of maybe some other way of thinking about it. Right. >> Well, I'll flesh out the model. I'll I'll try and be brief because there's a few other bits. So, what we could say is in anger, one way of conceptualizing it is in fact that it begins with a rigid demand or a goal. This is like based on standard models of cognitive appraal models of stress. and so on. Right? So saying what's actually in the background is I demand respect from other people. I expect to get my way. I expect my kids to listen to me or my wife to understand me. Right? And that expectation is not just like something that I prefer. It's a demand. It's quite rigid, right? And absolute. So that sets the stage for anger. And that's why anger has always been quite closely linked to the concept of frustration. Right? So rigid demands are a recipe for neurosis. They are bound to be frustrated at some point. And that frustration is kind of often seen as the germ of anger. So I demand that other people are polite to me. Like I damn well expect that my relatives all send me a birthday card every year. Now at some point they're bound not to do it. in which case, you know, I'm going to be hurt, right? Um, I'll be offended. I might cat, you could say I'm catastrophizing now, the fact that my demand wasn't met. Now, at this point, I might feel sad or anxious or shame or something depending on the the circumstances. It might be there's a kind of amplifier which might be that if I perceive what someone did is morally unjust like that's a common theme in anger, right? But it seems to be play the role of amplifying, you know, rather than just being a personal offense. If I think what you did was you lied to me, you deceived me, you're a rotten crook, you know, is what you did was fundamentally unjust, that seems to now amplify me and push me more in the direction of anger. But what at this point I might just kind of feel anxious or hurt or something like that. So what the the transition point I think comes with uh attributing blame to the other person and perceiving them as the source of the problem which radically shifts the way that I'm experiencing my emotion. And then that is often connected with what's sometimes called a global negative rating. I like to call it vilification. Right? So you kind of touched on that before. I might say it's all your fault actually. Right? And then I might say because you're a jerk, you're an idiot. Like you're, you know, you're a rotten person. Right? And so psychologists are very interested in this idea that you would pigeon hole somebody um and attach a label to them. And that that's obviously something that people tend to do when they're angry. Um some people think it's quite integral to anger. And then actually the um the desire for revenge usually happens kind of last in a way like it kind of comes downstream. So some some the ancients said it's really the desire for revenge that's definitive of anger. Other people have said it's more the vilification that they think of as being integral to it. It's probably some combination thereof. like there's a few ingredients kind of interacting with each other. But typically, if not always, the the kind of origin of it is in a preceding emotion of hurt or shame or anxiety and then the desire to kind of make the other person suffer or get back at them somehow, you know, uh like the lex talionus, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. Uh it's quite primitive uh way of thinking. Um but the you know the stoics would say you know the sage wouldn't have perceived himself as being hurt in the first place like Dioenese the cynic you know sticks and stones can hurt my bones but words you know will never harm me kind of thing you know it's like water off a duck's back to this age if somebody doesn't send him a birthday card right so he would he has nothing to get angry about in the first place let alone you know escalating it with these other irrational beliefs. >> Yeah. I think about Marcus Aurelius, you know, I think it's I think it's 2.1 where he talks about when you wake up in the morning, you know, remind yourself of the kind of people you'll encounter. Um, and that, you know, they'll they'll be busy and selfish and they'll have these issues. Um, and that's I feel like that's kind of trying to break down the rigid beliefs maybe of, you know, don't expect people to treat you a certain way just because you're emperor. And then at the end he's like remember that they're this way because they don't know you know go for >> yeah there's two things there. Let's conceptualize it a little bit. Okay. So what he's doing is you could say him in part as challenging the rigid demand. So the rigid demand is you know in a sense I expect everyone to be perfect and up to my high standard. And he's doing the opposite there. What the stoics often do is uh emphasize the fallibility of other people. They say I don't expect other people to be perfect. you know, I don't expect everybody to be wise. I don't expect everybody to be kind and considerate towards me. That's not realistic. So, in doing that, he's adopting more flexible and more adaptive way of thinking. And he's really undermining this rigidity. You know, the opposite would be I get up in the morning, I expect all these German envoys like, and all these senators from Rome be really polite to me and to be honest with me, and if they're not, that's just unbearable and it means they're complete jerks. you know, that would be the opposite of what he's doing. And then the other thing he's doing that ties in a bit, but I guess we could look phrase it in a slightly different way, like you said, he's saying, you know, they don't understand the the nature of the good, you know, so that because they're unwise, right? So he, like Socrates said, no man does evil knowingly and therefore no man does evil willingly. So, um, Marcus is countering what we call hostile attribution bias there. Like people that are prone to anger. Well, if somebody doesn't send them a say why, you know, like if you didn't say, Michael, if you uh didn't send me a a Christmas card or a birthday card, what might be the what could be the reason for that? >> I could have forgotten. >> Um, >> maybe you just forgot. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Maybe you didn't Maybe you didn't realize how important that is to me, right? or or something like that. Or maybe I come to think about I didn't send you one, right? But if I'm angry, I have a cognitive bias potentially called hostile attribution bias that makes me primed and more likely to think you did it to try and hurt me. Like you did it out of malice. Like you did it cuz you're a jerk. That's why you did it. Right? So I I'll tend to attribute to malicia to malicious intent on your part. And Marcus is countering that directly by saying, you know, these people like are not perfect, you know, they're not wise, like so I shouldn't expect them to completely understand the implications of everything they're doing. They're not doing it out of evil or malice, you know. Well, the stories generally are more likely to interpret other people's vicious behavior or um offending behavior uh to attribute it to ignorance rather than to malice, you know, which that's one way of dealing with it. And that definitely tends to defuse anger. Um you know, it really integral to a lot of anger is blaming other people and and viewing their actions as the the result of deliberate malice. >> Yeah, that makes a ton of sense to me. And then I was going to push it even further um at a risk of I don't want I don't want to say oh you've got this framework and Mark isn't doing the exact thing but it also seemed there he also has that line about um you know we're all part of the same I'm paraphrasing but we're all part of the same family like we're all we're all humans we're all connected by reason and that could be this like desire attack the desire for revenge as well right like why would I want to attack a part of myself why would I want to attack a part of my family there's at least parts of each of those I've never thought about and I wrote that down like less le rigid beliefs, less attribution of blame, less desire for revenge. Seems like he's hitting all of those. >> He has Yeah, there's another passage 2.1 is very important, but there's another passage that's very explicitly about anger and it's 11:18 and he lists 10 separate cognitive strategies for coping with anger. And it's it it's remarkable. Um, and I've talked about a lot, so I'm not going to talk about it as much today. But in those 10 strategies, you can potentially see him as targeting most of the or perhaps all of the different cognitive components of anger. The Stoics also use behavioral techniques to deal with anger like postponement and stuff like that. Like I mean, but here he's only talking about the cognitive side of stoicism and he's got 10 strategy. That's a lot, right? Um, actually one thing I'll say about that is I'll make a a a hypo a speculation that might surprise people. I'll stick my neck out, right? I taught psychotherapists for many years. I often say if I stood up and because this is exactly what I would do. I would stand up in front of the class with a whiteboard and I'd say, "Okay, guys, how many cognitive techniques can you think of for dealing with anger?" And we'll write them in the flip chart, right? And I think in a room full of like 30 people, clinical psychologists and therapists and stuff, they'd maybe come up with four or five, like, you know, unless we wanted to stand around all day, you know. Um, I think they definitely wouldn't come up with 10. I'd be I'd be kind of amazed if they actually come up with 10. They come with different versions of the same thing, but I don't think they'd come up with He has 10 distinct strategies. They're clearly distinct things. Right now, the the odd thing I'll say about that is I I that really puzzled me and I thought, what kind of guy would be able to do that? Right. Something doesn't kind of quite gel about this. And I I thought somebody um who can classify um a range of techniques like that, I'd expect that to be a researcher or a professor. a professor uh a professional teacher like some kind of academic expert like on the subject but Marcus really was not right so normally if I give if you've got anger problems and I give you an anger management book and it's got 10 techniques in it do you know what you're probably going to do you're going to probably pick the two or three that you like the best and that they work for you and you'll use those and forget about the rest right that's normally what people do like you wouldn't expect people to use all 10 of them and not only does He lists 10. He keeps returning to selections from the list throughout the rest of the meditations. Like he genuinely really understands all 10 of these techniques. So Marcus Aurelius I it seems to me has this kind of professional level of understanding of that's quite remarkable of the range of therapeutic techniques. That's genuinely surprising to me. And the only way that I can explain it is that I think he probably knew somebody who was like a an expert on stoic psychotherapy, you know, and if I had to guess, I'd say maybe it was Junius Rusticus like or one of somebody that he was really close to and spent a lot of time with that actually maybe had written a book about the subject and lectured on it and studied it systematically because he didn't develop that level of understanding by chats. I can promise you that. Like, you don't get that. You know, you're people that are listening to this video, many of them all have bookshelves full of self-help books, right? And they've probably gone on lots of workshops and stuff, but if I asked them to give me a range of 10 different cognitive strategies for coping with anger, I think they would struggle, right, in my experience. So he has a level of understanding that's really quite remarkable and it touches on most of these different cognitive components of the problem. >> So is there something else? Well, what are kind of the key lessons from Marcus? So we've established, you know, he's he's an expert on this or has this really impressive understanding. What are there some if you could pinpoint some insights that he shares that you think are really valuable or maybe neglected today? There are some things that are quite hard to understand because but I think he's on to something. Um and then there are other other things that are more obviously related um to the way that we would approach the subject today. Um for example, let's see. a a big part of it like Marcus obviously says you know when you're angry tell yourself it's not the other person's behavior that offends you but your opinion about it so he just paraphrases epictitus right so we call this verbal diffusion or cognitive distancing there lots of different names for it in psychology but this ability to shift your focus onto your own mental activity and become self-aware of how you're generating your anger through your opinions is of a very robust. We know from many research studies that this is a very flexible and robust way of dealing with emotions including anger. Other things he does that are less wellnown are he does a big component of anger um is we said earlier that anger is state of thinking as well as feeling. So one of the cognitive biases is that we know that angry people have impaired generally speaking they have impaired problem solving and decision-m ability. And the obvious reason for that is that they tend to not be very good at evaluating the consequences of their actions. So the clue is angry people often do stuff and then regret it afterwards when they've calmed down and you know they maybe feel ashamed of their actions afterwards or whatever because their brain's ability to evaluate the wider impact and longerterm consequences of their actions and also their ability to empathize with other people. So to imagine how their behavior appears to other people is all inhibited like by the state of mind that they're in. So those are all like you know it's a mixture of the emotion and also cognitive biases that become activated. So Marcus says to himself what does you more harm your anger or the thing that you're angry about which is a kind of a way of addressing that. Um basically it's also a way of shifting the focus of attention more internally. Like one of the key I said earlier anger could be viewed we could talk a lot about how anger functions as an emotional coping strategy but I said it was a kind of distraction technique. So the big thing that shifts with anger the obvious difference is that you tend to there's a dramatic change in your focus of attention. So when you get angry you tend to focus much more on the other person and you your focus becomes narrow. So you're not thinking about the wider situation, the context and so on. You're thinking in more immediate terms usually. Um so anything that heightens self-awareness and turns your attention back inwards is inherently antagonistic to anger. Angry people are not self-aware generally speaking, right? Um in the ancient world sometimes they would talk about the idea of holding up a mirror to somebody who was angry. You know, Senica does that verbally. He goes into great detail describing the face of angry people, what they look like to try and heighten self-consciousness, right? Um, so what does you more harm your anger or the thing that you're angry about? That question forces you to reflect not only on the thing you're angry about, but also to compare that to what's going on inside you. So, it forces you to turn your attention back inwards. Right? that the asking the very fact that you're asking that question is disruptive to this psychological sequence that constitutes anger basically. So it's a very powerful subtle question and also there's an element of functional analysis to it. So you might go okay yeah I'm starting to think more about consequences. Um Marcus elsewhere in the meditations says when you're getting angry you should ask yourself will I regret this later? you know, which seems like a, you know, just a quaint thing to say, but again, it's using that's forcing him to use his prefrontal cortex and to engage more in consequential thinking, if you want to put it in a slightly more technical term, and that that's contrary to what's normally going on in anger. Basically, that's that's inhibited or turned off off normally in anger, right? But smartly, like therapists will often get the clients to do a kind of costbenefit analysis of anger and weigh out the pros and cons of it. which you can do in a therapy session, but when somebody's uh the red mist descends and somebody's losing their temper, they're not going to say, "Hang on a minute. Well, I just get my flip chart out and I'll weigh up the pros and cons of punching this guy in the face like and I'll figure try and evaluate whether it's a net negative or a net positive. You haven't got the bandwidth to do that, right?" Um, and Marcus seems to realize that. So his uh kind of functional analysis type questions getting his techniques for thinking about the consequences are very concise. He just says, "Will I regret this later? Is the anger doing me more harm than the thing I'm angry?" But it's like one sentence. It's like a coping statement, right? Which like like again like like it's almost like he knows what he's talking about. like you know I mean I read a lot of books by people uh psychotherapists and self-help books and I think it kind of sounds if I read between the lines like this guy doesn't know what he's talking about right but honestly right there a lot of self-help books you think has this guy ever tried this like I hate to pick on Jordan Peterson all the time but you know I kind of think some of Jordan Peterson's advice you know I sort of think has this guy ever been in a fight like you know does he actually understand like about you should stand up straight like a lobster or something and make eye contact with everybody in order to project confidence. Right. Well, when I worked in schools in South London, if I told the 15year-olds kids that I was working with to do that, I think they would just immediately be like, "Well, I'm going to get my head kicked in if I do that." Right? Like, you know, there's a time and a place for that. You know, sometimes it's probably you're probably better off to keep your head down because you don't want to provoke people. Go making eye contact with them round about these streets. Um, so I think I this doesn't really sound like it's been tested out in practice that thoroughly, right? But with Marcus Aurelius and I'll give you another one by the way, Steven Cvy, you know, I'm not super into kind of management stuff, but when I read Steven Covey's book with seven habits of highly successful people, I thought I I can tell that this guy's actually been putting this into practice for a long time and he smoothed off the rough edges from it. It's very coherent. It's quite simple. Like it's kind of similar to stoicism in some ways, you know, but I think people actually underappreciate that old self-help book. >> But Marcus has that feel of like he genuinely knows what he's talking about. He's put these ideas in into practice, right? Like he's they're they're like they're they have the they pass the smell test, right? Um, yeah, I remember, um, I actually think it was in the seven habits for highly effective teens. I think that's the actual one I read way back in the way back in the day. And there was there was a story in that book about a value of a paradigm shift when you were getting angry with somebody. And it was this kind of anecdote of like you you have these the these cookies and someone stealing your cookies and you get all mad at them and then after they leave you realize that that was their cookies and you were actually like taking some of theirs by accident. >> Yeah. It's this kind of I think about that now as like oh that was like one of my first exposures to the stoic idea of like you know the cognitive component of um anger and this kind of paradigm shift. you you've given a really good illustration of the cognitive model of emotion like you know um there's another one that I think Beck gives which is he says you know for example imagine you you you hear you wake up in the middle of the night and you're alone in the house and you hear footsteps and you think oh my god there's like a burglar in the house like and so you kind of you're terrified and then you creep out into the hallway and you realize it's the cat or something right and then of course your anxiety is going to it wouldn't disappear immediately but It will it'll go away pretty quickly. Why did it go away? Because you went to the gym and channeled it and pumping things or whatever. No, like because you vented it or something cuz you suppressed it? No. Cuz your cognition's changed, >> right? Like your thing, your anxious thinking, your catastrophic thinking went poof because you realized it was just a big mistake like and then the anxiety may take a little while for your heart rate to go back down, but your anxiety is basically going to go away unless you start worrying about something else. So that I think that's a very important example. Um >> yeah, Donald, I feel like you could talk about this for much longer than the time we have set aside, but I would be I would be remiss if I didn't bring up I mean what I think is one of the most challenging questions and this one the Stoics I care about and take a hard line on. Is there >> is there ever a time when there's healthy anger? >> Um >> this is my favorite question. >> Yeah. >> All right. So I I've got enough intellectual humility to say that I don't know for sure. Right. And I I think that um it partly depends on how you define anger. So part of the problem is that people may I said earlier there's different types of anger. It's a little bit of a fuzzy cultural constructed concept. It's different in different societies. So people may have slightly different definitions of it. Right? What you call frustration I might call anger and so on. Right? Um, but I generally lean towards the stoic and Buddhist view like or traditionally the Buddhist view which is that basically all anger is kind of unnecessary and pointless which might surprise a lot of people. Um, I think that the I could talk for hours and hours about this, right? But the benefits that people attribute to anger are usually there's only a few. like it motivates them to fight injustice is probably um the main one. Or the other one that you get from therapists is it somehow it's like a message like tells you something >> um like that someone's mistreating you or or something like that. Um, I could talk all day about this, but I think both of those uh perceived benefits are flawed uh interpretations and also what they ignore. And this is so so weird. Like I've even I've read some books by quite famous academics, very highly regarded academics discussing anger. And the way that they evaluate it is they talk about the benefits and they don't do a costbenefit analysis. You think, hang on a minute, buddy. If you're going to list the benefits of something, you you have to list the costs as well. And then what matters would be whether it's a net like not the gross benefits, but the net benefits once you've deducted the costs from it, right? So it might be that anger motivates you, but if it also gives you a coronary heart attack, then the net benefit might suck, right? And you'd be better off doing something else instead. Okay? So you have to kind of look at it in a slightly more rounded way. But I would say even the perceived benefits are inherently flawed. So couple of things about it. The like I'll I'll do this really fast, right? So the idea that it sends you a message. Now what you get from anger is more like propaganda than a message, right? It's a distorted message, right? So you can extract information from it, but you can't usually take it at face value. And also like I said, anger typically is a secondary emotion. So it's a Johnny come lately on the scene if you actually observe it closely. What the message is coming from is the initial threat appraisal that preceded the anger and actually the anger is masking that like and clouding the issue. Right? So it's the thing that came before the anger of anything that has got a slightly less corrupted message in it that you might want to look at. And that that same objection actually applies to the thing about motivation. So there's two things I'd say about motivation. Anger basically causes you to release adrenaline, right? And that that'll motivate you for like 20 or 30 minutes, right? And then your body starts to produce cortisol and then you get the crappy effects of like longerterm stress, right? And you could kind of try keeping doing that. So it's like you you keep like uh you know pumping out more adrenaline, but you get diminishing returns from it and it has some quite negative like health effects over the long term. There's a wellestablished correlation between cardiovascular disease, very robust correlation between cardiovascular disease and anger. Mainly because anger increases your blood pressure more than any other emotion. And that's partly because it it increases your muscular tension more than uh any other emotion. But the um the idea that it motivates you, so let's say it produces adrenaline, right? It's not the anger that produces the adrenaline anyway. It's the initial threat appraisal. Like it's the fear that motivates you usually like when you're angry and then the anger comes on top of that. But you already had adrenaline like as soon as somebody insulted you or whatever and you were you know you got your heart rate started to accelerate and your original glands were stimulated. So it wasn't actually necessarily the anger that that triggered that. It's probably the emotion that preceded it. But also I call this is my final uh rejoinder to that for now. There's a meme on the internet that says drink coffee, do stupid things faster and with more energy. That's what I think this argument about anger motivating you sounds like to me because the costs of anger are that it dramatically impairs your decision- making, problem solving. Uh it tends to lead to crappy decisions in general. So it gives me some motivation, but it makes me crap at decision- making and makes me do stupid things, right? So to me, you might say, well, those disadvantages outweigh the benefits of the motivation. Not only that, it's a particularly toxic combination. So to be highly motivated, but stupider sounds like a recipe for disaster to me. Yeah. Like it sounds like you probably want to be less motivated and sit down and be quiet for a minute like until you've calmed down and you're no longer thinking about things in such rigid black and white and kind of catastrophic terms. In many cases, you might want to take a time out instead of being having an adrenaline rush and rushing into action when you're not thinking straight. Angry people tend to underestimate risk, right? Which makes them dangerous to be around. You may have noticed, right? It's well documented that angry people are reckless and impulsive because they underestimate risk, right? So they expose themselves and other people around them to more danger, right? They'll get you killed like in some situations. So we don't want them. It's anger almost is like doing a line of cocaine, right? Why would you want to in that situation, you know, give somebody an energy boost and make them more motivated on make, you know, doing stuff that they're probably going to regret afterwards. That that I think is part of the problem with uh the perceived benefit of of motivation. Um the other thing is that people say it concentrates the mind and focuses attention. That's awesome, but the flip side of that is selective thinking. So what you're actually describing is the fact that you're not using your prefrontal cortex properly and evaluating the context and the consequences of your action. You're just kind of like thinking about the immediate situation. That feels great, but that's a recipe for making stupid decisions. Again, so those are those are some of the things that I'm being a bit glib, but those are the some of the things I think people need to think through that might be the downside of anger. Well, one of my big takeaways from this conversation is that differentiation between the threat appraisal, the initial harm, and then anger's response to it. Because the typical counterpoint is that there's something kind of unethical about seeing political injustice. There's something unethical about, you know, somebody insults or harms your family member and you're not angry. It's like you're kind of failing in your role as a parent or a sibling or um but I think there's this way to break this apart where it's like you can evaluate a harm. >> I mean Stoics the Stoics have lots of arguments about if that's a harm. It depends on how stoic you are >> but you can evaluate that harm and then the piece of like well that person deserved revenge or I'm going to now you know address this in an angry way almost becomes entirely separate piece. >> I'm going to make things worse. like angry angry people specialize in making problems worse is how I would put it right they're real experts at making things wor I don't know if people have noticed that right so this is the partly what you're alluding to here in part is this American thing that I think stems from this history of the civil rights movement and the idea that being angry and protesting about stuff is a way to fight injustice now when I mentioned cross-cultural psychology earlier I think part of it is that that's quite an entrenched view in American culture, but it's not a view that's as common in other countries. So in Northern Ireland, for example, it would seem weird to say we should get really angry with the Catholics and really angry with the Protestants and protested aggressively what they're doing because everyone would think no, everyone needs to kind of like chill out like, you know, and be more calm. The only way that's the only way we're going to resolve the conflict. Um, in South Africa, Nelson Mandela said, "We need to leave our anger behind us like in order to understand the oppressor because if we view them as our enemy and we have a desire for revenge, we're never going to like live in peace." Gandhi said, "We're never going to be able to free India from colonialism as long as we are aggressive and get angry and see the the raj like the Brits as our our enemy like but in America it was different like and people embraced anger uh more on this model of it being a a motivating tool to express uh disagreement with injustice. is and where did that get us? Right? So, one of the problems with that I think we see played out all over the internet today. Right? I'll mention one other psychological fact, a social psychological observation about the nature of anger and the way that it affects politics. Right? If someone's really angry and they're like thumping the table and other people are listening to what they're saying, if you guys agree with me and I'm like getting really angry and worked up about something and I'm like, "This is terrible. It's an injustice. These guys are idiots. We'd have to do something about it." And you're like, "Yeah, you're right, Donald. Like, we're all in blood with this." So you if I ask you to evaluate my anger, you're going to say it's a marker of passion and integrity and it'll increase my credibility in your eyes, right? But if you guys disagree with my values and have an opposing view and I get really angry and start tub thumping and stuff, there's a biodal effect, right? It splits into two extremes. So you're more likely to think you just sound crazy and irrational and my credibility as a speaker will nose dive in your eyes. And I think that's American politics in a nutshell. Like and I think one of the best examples of it actually on the internet is is not an American. It's probably Greta Tunberg, right? Because the people that agree with her love it when she gets really angry and worked up about stuff because they think it just shows that she's passionate and has integrity and her credibility goes up in their eyes. But then the people that can't stand her and us skeptics about climate change and stuff like that love nothing more than posting pictures of her looking angry on the internet. And what do they say? It means that she's hysterical and irrational and therefore she has zero credibility in their eyes. Right? So the danger is that people in politics use anger because it raises their value among their inroup, right? So among other Democrats or other Republicans or whatever, but it creates much more division >> basically and it alienates people that don't share your values and it it really in other words, it's the opposite of Socratic dialogue, right? It prevents you. Do you know what Epictitus said to his students was the most valuable thing they could learn from Socrates? Epictitus loved Socrates. You know, he goes on about him all the time. Um he he tells his students that repeatedly that that's their supreme role model even above Zeno um or Dioynes, Socrates, and he should be emulating. He says, you know, the foremost thing that you could learn about him is how to get in a conversation with people without it degenerating into a squabble. That's what he's that's what he thinks. the main thing they can it's not like place theory of forms like or the definition of justice. It's like how to have a civil conversation with people without degenerating but anger clearly leads to this biodal effect which shatters that like and b completely undermines the the possibility of it of it happening. So I think it's a shame that this view became entrenched in American culture. The anger plays a positive role in protesting against social injustice because it's a big blind spot and it obscures the fact that in many ways it can actually backfire particularly over the longer time where people that don't agree with you will start to discount you like the Black Lives Matter movement. And again, the people that oppose that, the angrier the protests are, the more people just dismiss it as crazy and irrational, right? You know, clearly I mean it it's funny because like in Northern Ireland or you know in other countries around the world people would think obviously like you know but for some reason America's kind of fallen into this trap like well has a ratcheting or ratcheting type effect really where it's almost rational where if I see someone who's angry about a cause I agree with that's evidence that they're genuinely do care about that cause and now that this has become culturally standard If I see not angry at this then >> that is they don't agree with me. Yeah. Yeah, >> I think it to the extent that one can it would be a an excellent cycle to break. But it's >> I'll add one more one more thing about this, right, which I don't I don't really have time to go into, but this is something that I would speak to a lot of my clients about, right? The the fundamental disputation isn't that the costs outweigh the benefits. It's that the perceived benefits are actually paradoxically, ironically, self-defeating. right? In most cases when you're disputing a belief in cognitive therapy. So people think that anger is a good way of fighting injustice, but it might be actually it's backfiring in many cases and making the problem. It wouldn't be shocking. I mean again, we'd have to dissect the culture a little bit, but I mean it's an obvious thing to say that in many cases anger and aggression just lead to cycles of violence like and create more social division. that would be a a particularly controversial thing to say. Um, so in many cases I, you know, I think people achieve the opposite of what they're hoping to achieve by becoming really angry and worked up about things. I think the right in America love nothing more than when people on the left riot. Yeah. And likewise, you know, people on the left in America love nothing more like than when people on the right get really angry and iate and stuff because they think it's validating. It allows them to completely dismiss the perspective and that there's no middle ground anymore like you know everybody's driven towards like quite extreme positions. So yeah, I think like the realizing um that in the long run it's probably not really going to get you what you want. The other thing I mention, you mentioned some other examples. I was just going to touch on them very briefly like so I think there were things slightly different examples like for example protecting your family if somebody attacks them or something like that. Um so that and fundamental distinction that we have to make maybe I should have made this earlier is between aggression and anger right so usually when we talk about aggression we're talking about the behavior and when we talk about anger we're talking about the emotion and people typically confuse them and equate them right but the irony is that aggressive behavior uh in many cases naturally is not accompanied by anger. So the paradigmatic example of that would be what's called predatory aggression in animals and we have a clear example of that in the human species as well as in animals when people go deer hunting like or do engage in other forms of hunting. Um so an if you get like really really angry when you try to shoot a deer like not going to help you at all. It would seem ridiculous, right? So to be like a really good hunter, you probably want to be completely calm and unemotional like and just focus on what you're doing. And that's the same even in the animal kingdom. Predatory aggression isn't usually accompanied by anger cuz anger makes you reckless, impulsive. It clouds your judgment. Like you need to be really focused and rational like and see things clearly like a sniper, you know, in the military or something like that if you're going to use aggression uh effectively. I mean, I think it would be the same in martial arts and wrestling and things like that, right? Like the example that the easy example is Muhammad Ali fighting George Foreman, you know, I said, "How am I going to beat this guy? I'll make him angry, right? Provoke him." And Judge Foreman what threw too many punches and exhausted himself in the first few rounds and Muhammad Ali beat him like because partly because he provoked him made him lose his temper. So aggression like often makes people do stupid thing like for example it might make somebody who's in a fight drop their guard because you underestimate risk and your focus is more just on attacking the other people. But the other I'll say one other thing about aggression and about anger to leave you with. Right? If you actually look at the evolutionary precursors of it, our emotion of anger has less in common with defensive aggression where you probably also want to be unemotion like and just really focused on getting the job done, right? Or predatory aggression. the thing that it resembles most, and for some reason people don't usually think of this as the analogy, it's more like ritualistic displays of dominance in uh primate uh society. It's when chimps start banging their chest and shrieking and stuff to assert dominance. And the difference is when a chimp is hunting a monkey, why it's very quiet and it stays out of view, right? Doesn't want to be seen generally speaking. Um, but in ritualistic aggression, it's completely opposite. You want to be seen, right? And so it's more about like the I think the evolutionary precursor of what we call anger has got far more to do with social status than it has to do with fighting and defending yourself. It's got very little to do with fighting actually. Like there are reasons why it lapses into desire for revenge and stuff like that. But really, it's more about getting people to submit to your authority and apologize to you and sub making asserting your dominance and getting them to to become subordinate to you essentially. So we anger is a big display, right? And the behavior that would be useful in displaying anger and making a big show out of it is often really unhelpful in terms of dealing with a dangerous situation or hunting or something like that. Like it's the complete opposite in a sense. I'll give you one other little analogy. In the ancient world um me wars often were actually more about dominance. So tribal in tribal warfare often not that many people are killed like they'll kind of run screaming at each other like a highland charge and they just want to frighten the enemy and a few people get injured. the people tend to slash with swords or axes and they get they they're partly they're keeping the other person at a distance from them by doing that like and it causes superficial wounds and maybe a couple of guys get killed like and then everybody goes home like we haven't wiped out the entire other tribe or whatever but sometimes it becomes more of a professional job like in the Roman legions where they had to train the legionaries to run people through with their swords right? And to fight in silence, right? So what the Romans were doing was putting a lot of effort into training people to replace this natural kind of dominance behavior which is really not conducive to being a killing machine like and replace it with pure aggression. Behave more like hunters in a way. Be very quiet and very focused and just go for the kill rather than just trying to make a big show and frighten the enemy away. >> Yeah. Great. Um that that's just left me with a lot to think about that difference between the kind the social component of anger, the dominance component, the display. Um I really like the distinction between aggression and anger. And I mean as a lifetime practitioner of martial arts, I'm thinking about that as almost a the training of aggression and not anger, if that's the distinction you want to call it, or the control of aggression. >> Um absolutely. Um we're Donald, I really want to thank you. um for the conversation. I really enjoyed it. Um and I want to thank everybody who joined to watch live as well. This was our first um Substack live event and it seemed it seemed to go well and appreciate everybody everybody joining. Um Donald, any any kind of last words either on anger or on you know what you're working on right now that you want to share with those with those watching? I think if people just wanted to check out my Substack, you know, they can find a lot of articles about anger there and some podcasts. I'll tell you a couple of podcasts I did. I uh interviewed um Ray De Jeppi who's one of the world's leading experts on research on psychotherapy for anger. And I interviewed um him actually and I talked to him about Marcus Aurelius and we went through those 10 techniques and I said, "Ray, how did each one of these like compare to things that we would do in CBT, do you think?" And we had a little bit of a a conversation about that. So, I'm hoping maybe one day to do like a series of podcasts where I interview a lot of famous psychologists or psychotherapists and specifically talk to do a series talking to all of them about stoicism and anger maybe if I have time. But they uh they can check that out. Um, I'm working on a book about anger, but it won't be out for quite a long time. And I guess what would I if there's something that I can maybe leave people with that might be relevant to this? I think it's really just the the simplest advice about anger is bearing in mind that there, as we said, there's a few different types of anger, but the most common one, there's usually a preceding emotion. if you can notice what the preceding emotion is and then funny some advice in psychotherapy is surprisingly simple and works surprisingly well and then there's other things that really tricky. So often just telling people uh you know the initial feeling of kind of anxiety or hurt just sit with it for another five or 10 seconds like longer than normal and just like pause and allow yourself to fully experience it. And for some reason, probably for multiple reasons, that tends to have quite a profound effect. Um cuz usually, you know, you only have to pause for five or 10 seconds to disrupt the anger from escalating. And and usually by the time people start to think, why did that hurt me so much? Like when I asked my kids to go to bed and they ignored me or you know something, you know, why did I feel so frustrated about that? And naturally, if you just pause a bit, you'll begin to think maybe there are other ways of feeling about this or other ways of responding to it. And then that's already derailed the anger. Usually, you don't even get to the anger, you know. >> Very, very stoic, very just that that space between um yeah, between your impression and your ascent. Try to make that as long as possible. >> That's a good way of putting it. >> Great. Thanks, Al. Appreciate it. >> Thank you guys. It's been a pleasure. Chill then. Bye-bye. Next time. Thanks all. Bye everyone.
