---
title: "The Stoic Paradoxes (Episode 188)"
slug: the-stoic-paradoxes
episode_number: 188
youtube_id: JH9epBkU26w
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JH9epBkU26w
upload_date: 2025-06-17
duration: 48:41
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Caleb Montteros and my name is Michael Troble and today we're going to be talking about Cicero's Stoic Paradoxes. We've talked about his on ends defibus and now we're diving into another work of his. Yeah. again. So this one this is a a short work by Cisro something um I don't know maybe maybe 30 pages in the form that we have it where Cicero covers six of the most famous stoic paradoxes and I think um launches defense of them and so these are like controversial confusing strange things that the stoics said or were committed to and I think it's worth going over for two reasons one it's just it's interesting they're interesting examples of kind unintuitive positions the Stoics held. And then two, I think the way a lot of these are framed is kind of intentionally inflammatory. Like it's they're framed in ways that that sound really silly and then the Stoics have this kind of argument behind it and you go, "Oh, okay. If that's what you mean, then that makes sense." And so I think it's almost this this test of stoic knowledge where it's like if you if you understand these arguments, you understand a lot of stoic ethics, you understand how the Stoics would come to that conclusion. And so if if you if you find them, I guess, not that unintuitive or you understand the position, yeah, I just think that's a good benchmark for your understanding of stoic ethics. So I thought it'd be fun to go through. Cool. Yeah, let's do it. Um, cool. Yeah. So, there's six of them. The just at the start the list for those interested, it's number one, virtue is the sole good. Number two, virtue is the sole requisite for happiness or it's sufficient for happiness. Three, all good deeds are equally virtuous and all bad deeds equally vicious. Four, all fools are mad. Five, only the wise are free whereas all fools are enslaved. and six only the rise the wise are rich and so we'll go through those one by one break down what a bit of what sister has to say about it and then some you know why the stoics are committed to these ideas so starting with number one virtue is the soul good um the thing that's interesting about this is a it's a famous stoic argument I think it's like the foundation we talk about it all the time anybody listening to this podcast is probably familiar with that idea it may not seem like a paradigm to us or people you know studying stoicism or interested in stoicism because you've thought about it so much and you've you've internalized a stoic argument but but it's the stoic paradox because it's really I think absurd and kind of counterintuitive for anybody who's not a stoic you know to say to to win the lottery isn't a good thing you know even to have a you know have a shelter isn't a good thing to have water when you're thirsty isn't a good thing to have a loving family isn't a good thing this is very this very very strange and unintuitive. Um, and so what Cicero has to say in defense of this, these are longer passages. I'm just going to pull out quotes for each. He says, "Is it possible for a man not to be good when he lives in the very abundance of good things?" And yet we see all those things so distributed that wicked men possess them, and that they are inospicious to the good. Now let any man indulge his raery if he please, but right reason will ever have more weight with me than the opinion of the multitude. Nor shall I ever account a man when he has lost his stock of cattle or furniture to have lost his good things. Um so to break that down, Cicero is using a kind of reductio adabsum argument here. If virtue is not the only good, then bad people, vicious people would have good things and so have good lives because vicious people have any anything you ascribe the good to that isn't uh virtue, you could point to a bad person who has it, you know. So if it if it's money, if it's good reputation, if it's um like we were saying before, it's like it's it's pleasure. Um, you know, vicious people have that. So, you know, if good things make a life good, vicious people have everything but virtue, but yet they're not good. And and their lives aren't good. And so, it's impossible for anything else to be good besides virtue. Um, that's the argument Cicero is making here. We've come at this one a couple different ways as well. There's this there's this other thing that other argument the Stoics make that good things are things that are necessarily beneficial. Um so you know having money can't be a good thing. It's not necessarily beneficial. It can sometimes people's lives go worse with money. And the same argument you know if you have a vicious person with money they don't necessarily have a good life. Um so that's the argument there for that. It's a it's the core stoic position, but it's the thing that like, you know, it is the it's also really unintuitive if you're not bought into it and doesn't sound convincing to a normal person without that sufficient additional argument. Um, yeah. What do you think about the first one? That's a I think it's a central stoic idea, of course. I think especially these first two if you're familiar at all with stoicism one of these these are in a sense the key claims the philosophy makes that virtue is the sole good and that it is the sole requisite for happiness or that it's necessary and sufficient for happiness and uh there are a number of different ways to come at it perhaps this argument isn't the most plausible one uh isn't the strongest one but I think you know as you say it is one of these key ideas and uh well I think essential to understand stoism and one reason you might think it's true uh is the one that gives namely that it doesn't what many apparent goods and evils don't sort of separate the wheat from the chaff as it were when it comes to thinking about the kind of life one wants to live you know they don't make the difference between a good life and a life these all these what the Stoics call indifference fame health wealth reputation and so on. Yeah. So you just in plain language just again Cisero's argument is um to have a good life is to have good things definitionally but you know vicious people don't have good lives bad people don't have good lives morally bad people and yet uh you know if you look across the planet all the morally bad people you're going to find them having every single thing that you could call good in some variation or some form except virtue definitionally because they're vicious and bad people. And so, you know, if if so, none of those things can be good because, you know, the person who had them would have a good life if they were good even if they didn't have uh virtue. Yeah. And I think that's a compelling one. I mean, maybe it's not the maybe it's not the strongest as you said, but I think it's compelling or at least it kind of makes this category difference about there's something I guess it kind of makes this argument that virtue is necessary for happiness. Maybe that's the weakness in it is it's an argument that virtue is necessary for happiness. It's impossible to have a good life without also having virtue, but because you you know you can't find anybody that has a good life that doesn't have virtue, even if they have all these other things, which is maybe a slightly different argument than virtue being the sole good. Yeah, that's a great way to put it. And I think and that is, you know, exactly what Cicero debates in on ends. you know, perhaps it is necessary and he grants that it's necessary, but is it really sufficient for happiness? And I think that's a that's a good attack on the argument as it were, and I don't want to underrate how strong it is by my earlier comments. And in a way, Cicero does pull out how intuitive it can be, even though we say it's counterintuitive. He says, "Look, we don't say he's a terrible person or has lived a terrible life just because he's lost some of his stock, just because of his house burned or, you know, just because he faced whatever trials and challenges." That's not, you know, that's not what it's all about. It's um one thing I also wanted to shout out here is there's a nice passage from meditations 211 where Marcus Aurelius hits on this as well. Uh this this exact point. He says, "But death certainly and life honor and dishonor, pain and pleasure, all those things equally happen to good men and bad being both things which make us neither better nor worse. Therefore, they are neither good nor evil." So, it's nice to see that that theme repeated uh in the Stoic Emperor. Yeah, that's a great example. We Yeah, we I'm I'm just thinking of silly metaphors I'm making in my head, but you know, like, you know, if we think about what makes a good basketball player, it's not the shoes you wear, it's not your haircut, it's not the language you speak, because lots of good basketball players vary in all these kinds of things, right? It's like it's like clearly it's that old kind of ancient philosophy argument. I remember there's that meme, I don't know if you've seen it, Caleb, where it's like, you know, uh you know, the car drives both the car and the house have windows but you know the car drives but the house doesn't so it can't be the windows that make the the car drive or something and they're like this is unironically how Plato argues it's the kind of thing like that like it can't be essential to happiness saying it can't be necessary because there's variations it can't be it's not the thing we want to identify as it and you already alluded to this it's also uh in stoic ethics it's like really intertwined with the second idea the second paradox that virtue is the sole requisite for happiness. Um so it is sufficient for happiness. And what Cicero says here, he says, "No man who is wholly consistent within himself and who reposes all his interests in himself alone can be otherwise than completely happy. But the man whose every hope and scheme and design depends upon fortune, such a man can have no certainty, can possess nothing assured to him as destined to continue for a single day. If you have any such man in your power, you may terrify him by threats of death or exile. But what whatever can happen to me in so ungrateful a country will find me not only not opposing, but even not refusing it. Do you threaten me with death, which is separating me from mankind, or with exile, which is removing me from the wicked? Death is dreadful to the man whose all is extinguished with his life, but not to him whose glory can never die. Exile is terrible to those who have, as it were, a circumscribed habitation, but not to those who look upon the whole globe, but as one city. Um so some nice lines there. It follows from the previous passage as we mentioned virtue is the only good. It's the only thing required to be happy. And again I think Cicero is trying to push back at some counterarguments. So we think we need these other things to be happy. We think look you can't be happy in exile. But then he points out well you know it's it's your it's your attachment to external things. It's your false judgments that is going to make these things terrible. Exile and death. Um they can't harm the person who's interested in his character alone. So you know that it it is sufficient to be happy as long as you have your character tuned in um and you know virtuous. Absolutely. And uh I I like how in this passage there's mention of some of these other stoic ideas. you have cosmopolitanism you know can look upon the whole globe as one city you know this idea that the stoic isn't necessarily bound to the uh particular city and then you can extend that idea to any other social relationship as well uh whether it's a city community company um so I thought I think that's that's that's good to see and of course you have the idea of stoic stoic views on death you know death is not a great evil and that you know the kind of glory that matters is something that cannot be extinguished by death you know I think Senica is this wonderful metaphor about the book you know the length of a book doesn't determine how good it is um so I think that's uh and all all these are related to this idea that virtue is all that's required for happiness and not not just that but is sufficient for happiness Yeah, great points. Um, I like that line, too. Death is dreadful to the man who is whose all is extinguished with his life. Like, you know, if you're if you're just attached to these external things, you know, you want pleasure, you go out and do things outside of yourself, you know, all of that is all of that is extinguished when you die. But if you're focused really on um I guess you know having that glory being internally excellent. There's uh you're not you're not fearful in the same way. I'll move on to number three now which is all good deeds are equally virtuous and all bad deeds equally vicious. I think this is the one where we enter the realm of things that will probably seem like paradoxes to even to people listening to this podcast because we're getting into some like technical stoic arguments here which um people might find counterintuitive or disagree with. So what Cisero says here um the matter it may be said is a trifle but the crime is enormous. So this is talking about like you know when you do something bad for crimes are not to be measured by the issue of events but from the bad intentions of men. The fact in which the sin consists may be greater in one instance and less in another but guilt itself in whatsoever light you behold it is the same. A pilot oversets a ship laden with gold or one laden with straw. In value there is some difference but in the ignorance of the pilot there is none. Your illicit desire has fallen upon an obscure female. The mortification affects fewer persons than if it had broken out in the case of some highborn and noble virgin. Nevertheless, it has been guilty if it be guilty to overstep the mark. And so Cicero's point is that what what matters is virtue. If what matters is virtue, then the external situation is irrelevant. If you have improper lusts for, you know, some unknown woman and you you you go about that in a poor way, it doesn't make it any better than lusting after a noble or famous person. If you crash a ship that an inexpensive unimportant ship, you still made the same mistake as a captain as if you crashed a a ship of gold. You still made the same kind of mistake. And so I think there's two points here. So one is that you know when we're calculating errors we don't because indifference or indifference we don't excuse things by making reference to this kind of like utilitarian calculus about the external world right? If you if you if you were angry that's a problem. It doesn't it doesn't matter you know oh you you hit somebody or oh you you know you were by yourself so you didn't hit somebody. Right? That's point number one. And then I think point number two here which you know we don't capture in in the Cisero quote I pulled out is that the Stoics have this tendency to think about things really in terms of a binary. Um you know this comes down it connects to the next paradox where Cicero says that all fools are mad. Like they really think about you're either virtuous or you're vicious. Basically it's it's like you either got the impression right or you got the impression wrong. and they don't really hold stock on well you kind of interpret it correctly. You you you know you you did a you you did an incorrect interpretation that led to less of a external issue than another incorrect interpretation. It's like either you know you either respond you either got it right or you got it wrong and that's the way the stoics think about a lot of things and that's where they're they say all good deeds are equally virtuous. It's just like all all judgments are true or false and the true ones are equally true and the false ones are equally false. And it doesn't really matter if you were false about you you were piloting a ship of gold or piloting a ship of straw. You made a false judgment or a true judgment. And that's uh that's the second part there that the Stoics commit to. Any thoughts on this one? Well, the second example I think is a funny sort of uh slice of Roman ethics or Roman culture. So, you know, stand out. It's a sort of thing. Well, at least you're, you know, some Roman might be thinking at least I'm bothering some obscure unknown woman as opposed to some highborn noble virgin but a vestial version or something like this. So, uh yeah, that's that's amusing. I think this is this is certainly I think as you as you say this is certainly one a more puzzling one and perhaps it's easier to see why the stoics would say this coming at this from the standpoint of virtue all virtuous acts are equally good at least for me so if you think about you sort of have classic stories of sacrifice you know like the noble man gives all his gold you know the powerful knight gives up shield for the church. There's sort of these classic sort of myths about sacrifice Christian might have, but the person who gets a shout out is this beggar who gives, you know, this this bare slice of toast left over or something like this. And I suppose the theme of this kind of story is that it's not just sort of the results that matter. And certain I think this is certainly one that maps on nicely to Christian ethics, but also stoic ethics. You know, it's really the quality of the choice, the decision that was made by each individual person and how that reveals uh their character. You know, what the beggar is able to give is different from what the noble man, the the knight is able to give and so on. And in that way, you the best choice for the noble is equally good as the best choice for the beggar in the sense that matters because you're just selecting. that you know both of them are just selecting between what's possible and selecting between having a you know exhibiting a good character or a bad character in reality and the decisions they face. So I think that's perhaps an at least for me that's maybe an easier way to to come at this idea is starting from you know what's uh and why the Stoics would say this you know why why they would say all good deeds are equally virtuous and I think it's it's also related to the previous ideas just because there's no intensity of goodness. There's not more or less goodness, right? Because if there could be, then that at least sort of opens up the door for indifference to matter. You know, if it was better to live a long life than a short one, then you I don't think the Stoics could explain that uh in in any fundamental sense. So uh because it can't be better to live a short life than a long one or better to live a long life than a short one. Uh or either direction I suppose you're left with you know it's just a good life doesn't matter how long and thus good life good deeds good character and so on. As soon as you've reached goodness as it were that's uh that's all that matters. Yeah. What do you think about that way of coming at it? No, I think I mean I think it's really smart to start with like separating the two and say, well, it's a little bit easier to stomach the first half. All good deeds are equally virtuous. It's a little bit easier to stomach this idea that, you know, it's it's the the beggar who gives up something important to him is as val, you know, did as good of a thing as the rich person who gave up something important to him. Even if, you know, it's a single piece of bread, as you said. I think that makes sense. I think the then then because if you because if you allow dynamic and scale then you bring in value and that I mean this is a Aristotle's argument right which is like it's better to be a rich guy because rich people can be more excellent you can you can be more generous literally because you can give away more money and so the stoics I think are yeah I think you're right rightly pointing out blocking those kinds of arguments I mean the counterargument that Cicero comes up with so let me get to the part that all bad deeds are equally vicious which sounds a little bit more difficult to swallow. Cicero later or in the same passage says you know somebody he feels a counter argument which is like is killing a stranger just as bad as killing your father like what are you talking about and you can push that even further you know like is me getting a little jealous about something the same as killing my father like doesn't seem to be that way seems a bit of a stupid argument and I think to really understand what the stoics are saying here you you almost do like a transposition of these terms right like that's what I was trying to do before which is like good deeds becomes true judgments and so all good you know all true judgments are equally true and all bad judgments are equally false and that it's not helpful to think of them I guess in terms of degrees or scales and it's not kind of the way that Stokes would think about and so getting jealous I've thought something false killing my father I've thought something false you know assuming it wasn't the correct thing to do in that case you know killing someone out of anger, let's say, and it it almost becomes like luck or fade or chance, as you said. It almost like introduces this like, well, this was only less this was only a less bad false judgment because of the externals at play which happened to be less important than these other ones and you start you start interact you start introducing like kind of the scale or degrees that relies upon the inherent value of externals. And if you remove that, then it's just like, well, you made a bad you made a false choice in in a vacuum. This other person made a false choice in a vacuum. And it's just kind of like circumstance or chance that made one less important than the other. Um, but you so so you know, you should treat those equally and be careful not to do it in either case. That's my attempt to recover the stoic position. What do you think? Yeah, it does get tricky. Uh and I think this certainly is one of the more challenging stoke positions because you think about okay in the in the good case the the case the case I gave earlier the best action for the noble for the beggar maybe those are equal in some sense but if you're the noble is every action that's not the best action equally bad that doesn't I think that's just the that's just a paradox right? You know, if they had gave given slightly less gold, is that equally bad to not giving it all or to, you know, stealing the gifts or or what have you? And that just seems quite puzzling. And per perhaps, yeah, there is a much there they're both both of those acts would reveal ignorance. I mean, they the Stokes would just say it's vicious and that's all you need to say about it. And there is something I think the stoic that that stoic move is important but you you feel like that's not the whole picture right that's just you know you're making you're making decisions some of these differences between giving slightly less not giving at all they seem to matter. Yeah, I think this is one of the most frustrating things about stoicism is for a school that has so many practical advice, has such great practical advice. The early Stoics got like really committed to not talking about progress or not talking about degrees of virtue. And you'll see this running through the rest of them, but it's a good idea to introduce now. Like a lot of these issues just come up because of this refusal to acknowledge that like some people are better than others even without being sages. Some people are closer to sagehood. And the stoics make this metaphor of drowning. You know they they give this famous metaphor of you know the person at the bottom of the ocean or six feet from the surface is still drowning. And functionally drowning is drowning. You know, in one sense you're closer to the surface, but you're equally drowning. And it leads to all those paradoxes you said, right? Which is like the Yeah. The knight acting nonoptimally is not the same thing as the knight that burns the village down and slaughters everybody who who, you know, reserves a little bit of gold for themselves when they come to that moment of like charity. We can see that one is clearly closer to virtue, but the stoic's like inability to accept that in a way that I find it's almost like unhelpful. I find it's almost like an unhelpful way of talking about progress. Yeah, I think so. It's noteworthy that Cicero is writing uh earlier than the big three Roman stoics, Senica, Marcus Aurelius, and Epictitus of course where you see or I would argue see a less of a focus on sort of this early Greek dogmatic kind of rigidity to to the to the system, which isn't to say some of that's not there, but it's not something they would highlight or focus on whether or not they they believed it and certainly they have ideas of progress. Epictitus, Senica and so on. They think it even if it's true, there's some way you can make sense of progress. Yeah, I think that well I think that's a great way to put it. I think you've got the early Stoics who really get committed to these kind of these these sharp ideas of dichotoies between the virtuous and the vicious. You've got Cicero kind of wrestling with that in the form of these stoic paradoxes. And then you've got Senica, Epictitus, um, and Marcus, which is kind of the the the latest period of ancient stoicism, who have almost like moved past these and just gotten straight into like the ethics and the applicability and the training. Um, either personally for their students or for their mentors and or their mentees. Um, yeah, I didn't think of it that way, but that that's a cool way of thinking about it. I think it's right. Um I'll move to the next one which is all fools are mad. So the last one was all good deeds are equally vicious or equally virtuous and all bad deeds equally vicious. Number four is all fools are mad. Cisero said, "Could the mind of the wise man fortified as with walls by depth of counsel, by patient endurance of human ills, by contempt of fortune, in short, by all the virtues, a mind that could not be expelled out of this community? Shall such a mind be overpowered and taken by a storm? For what do we call a community? Surely not every assembly of thieves and ruffians? Is it then the entire rabble of outlaws and robbers assembled in one place? No, you will doubtless reply. Um, so this chapter it's about Publius Claius, a Roman known for his terrible morals. Um, and this the Stoic argument is that ignorance is not just ignorance. It's a it's a type of madness. Madness because uh ignorance distorts your thinking. So it's it's not just that there are multiple functional ways of thinking, some right, some wrong. Rather, any view that isn't stoic, it will inevitably lead to passions or a kind of disconnect with the way the world actually is. This leads to a uh irrational responses above and beyond factually incorrect claims. And the way that I interpret this reading is that the Stoics are trying to raise the stakes here. They're trying to say foolishness is a big deal. It's a kind of madness. And then they're accompanying this with that dichotomy we were just talking about about virtue and vice. You know, ignorance is a type of madness. Everybody who's not virtuous is ignorant. So all fools all fools are mad is the argument. And I think yeah, you're getting that dichotomy and then you're raising the stakes. Um, and then this is a paradox because the view would just be, well, madness is a very different kind of thing from foolishness. You know, there's people that want the wrong things, but that doesn't make them mad. They're like rational agents pursuing the wrong conception of of the good life. And the Stoics just say, "No, no, they're not able to think rationally because they desire these external things because they desire pleasure or riches or reputation or they're fearful of of the opposites. you know, they're not they're not rational at all. Um, only the wise person is. How does that connect to this first part of the quote? How do you see that connecting to the first part of the quote? I did at one point have a thought on this. um like attempt to fortune in short B of choose a mind that cannot be I mean I guess the first part of the quote is saying basically the the way that I'm reading that there is that the the wise man cannot be overcome can't be overpowered can't be taken by the storm where you know the non-wise person can and that's kind of the dichotomy taken So it's like the the inversion of all fools are mad would be you know all wise people are sane and then what what allows that sanity is that is that inability to be yeah overpowered by passion or desires. Gotcha. Yeah. So, it's really the classic view on passions, especially I think Senica does a good job bringing this out about how the passions are kind of madness because they overpower reason and become a force that drives one's life. Uh as opposed to uh the person who's not suffering from passions, they're more of an agent. They're more of an author of their life. Yeah. Uh in a way. So, uh, the person who is foolish, is vicious, is, you know, why do we some say someone's crazy? Because maybe they're disconnected from reality in a certain way. Yeah. And that's just what the the foolish, vicious person exhibits. Yeah. Again, not not well, they're they've got a good head on their shoulders. they just kind of want something different than I want. The stoic position is is just more intense. It's saying no, they're disconnected from reality is the way you put it, which is the same thing we say about crazy people or you know, we would use that term, right, colloquially. And so there's there's just yeah that there's there's a higher stakes around that disconnect. And it was I think these were also like motiv like I think these were intentionally antagonistic kind of paradoxes that were supposed to be motivational. Like the stoic would come out and be like, "You're all literally mad." Like, "I think I think you are you are actually mad." And then the non- stoke would be like, "Well, that's I don't want to be mad. Like, what are you talking about? That's a pretty intense thing to say. What's going on?" And it kind of it would motivate people to um yeah, hear more about the philosophy or study the philosophy. I think it's I think these are supposed to be attentiongrabbing a bit. Yeah, I think that's right because even in the the term madness being crazy, there's a kind of vagueness there. Even the stoics would say that, you know, all the vicious are mad, all foolish are mad, they still distinguish between, you know, someone suffering hallucinations. Yeah. and some other person whose sort of uh faculty of reason as such was working normally, they'd still make a distinction between those people. So I think one way to see it is that you know the kind of madness ultimately matters for a rational human that you know that that's what you want to avoid and you avoid it by uh not being ignorant by cultivating knowledge and so on. Just going back to this these other key themes about stoism that we've hit on. Mhm. Great. So, moving on to number five. Um, this is the idea that only the wise are free, whereas all fools are enslaved. So, basically, we're just we're just hitting the fools with lots of insults here. So, first they were mad, now they're also enslaved. Cicero says, "But how or over what free man will he, the you the the fool, exercise control who cannot command his own passions? Let him in the first place bridle his lusts. Let him despise pleasures. Let him subdue anger. Let him get the better of avarice. Let him expune the other stains on his character. And then when he himself is no longer in subjection to disgrace and degragation, degradation, the most savage tyrants, let him then, I say, begin to command others. But while he is subservient to these, not only is he not to be regarded as a general, but he is by no means to be considered as even a free man. So that point there is that look, you might think because you're a general, because you're uh powerful, because you're a boss, because you're a, you know, a emperor, you might think, you know, you're the you're free and you're controlling others. And it's this kind of stoic argument that, well, you're actually being controlled by something yourself. You're being controlled by your desires, your passions. They're dictating you. who they're determining what you do as Cicero calls them the most savage tyrants. And so you shouldn't, you know, not only should you not be considered a general, you shouldn't even be considered free. You should be considered a slave if you're in that kind of position. This is a very Epictitan argument. Epictitus does this a lot. Basically, the idea is that freedom comes from self determination. You just mentioned that Caleb is like self authorship. It's like an inability to be controlled by others. You know, one might think of Nero, as an example, as being fully self-determinant, indulging in everything that Nero wants to do. Nobody can stop Nero from doing what Nero wants. But the Stoics would view him in the grips of a kind of madness. He's not, you know, he's being controlled by these desires. He's not determining his own life. This is an argument that goes back to Plato's Republic, right? Like Plato frames in that book this idea that we don't want to be controlled by our desires. We want to, you know, set out a rational course for our lives, plan our lives from a position of reason and then, you know, use our motivation to help us get there, but not kind of the other way around. And they obviously have a different view of the soul than Plato, the Stoics did, but that same kind of argument remains. And you know again with the provocative nature of the claim um you Cicero Cicero is communicating to an educated audience here a very powerful wealthy audience. And so to make an analogy between them and enslaved people is you know it's provocative just like when the Stoics did it um in Athens as well. Yeah, this is a good one. I think and when uh you know maybe we rest a little bit with three or four at least I do but I think this is a a really useful one especially given the way many of us think about freedom today you know just being allowed to do what you please or something like this or a freedom from external constraints I think it's um important for the stoics to think about or I guess what they they challenge one to think about is it's not just external constraints it's free from internal passions not merely doing what you want but putting a question mark next to people's wants and asking you know whether they're grounded in knowledge or ignorance and I think it's a it's a it's you know I think that's the kind of freedom worth worth aiming for I suppose this is a stoic one or I think it's really common across really most of the ancient Greek philosophies of life so uh I think that's uh yeah this is I think this is a good one I like this one yeah it's also nice because it's a paradox It does hit as a paradox. It's not just like insulting. It's a paradox because it I guess plays on how as you said how we think about freedom. You know most people think about freedom in one way. You know uh by that criteria I can do what I want. Then you know the the general the emperor is free. Stoics have this different definition of freedom that you have to kind of work to understand that freedom makes sense, but it makes the original claim kind of yeah surprising. And they're going to do the same thing with the next one. That's number six. Only the wise are rich. Same kind of thing. The person says, "Well, I think of richness as having a lot of money and I know a lot of notwise people who have a lot of money. So what are you talking about?" And Cicero says, "For whom are we to understand to be rich man? To what kind of man do we apply the term? To the man, as I suppose, whose possessions are such that he may be well contented to to live liberally, who has no desire, no hankering after, no wish for more. It is your own mind and not the talk of others, nor your possessions, that must pronounce you to be rich. For it ought to think that nothing is wanting to it, and care for nothing beyond. Is it satiated or even contented with your money? Um, so I think this is I like this because I think it's actually not that surprising of a definition. Like when we said freedom is self-determination, we're kind of that's kind of philosophical. It's kind of maybe not immediately intuitive, but Cisero just makes this really I think common sense definition of wealth. Wealth is not wanting more. Wealth is not having a hankering, a hankering after no desire, no wish. And so people try to achieve that state by getting lots of money. And Cicero points out, no, you actually achieve that state by uh getting to a state of mind, by achieving uh wisdom. And so, you know, if richness, if richness is the person who wants nothing else, they're happy with what they have. You don't get that by having lots of things. You get that by becoming wise. And that's why the only the wise are rich. Um so same kind of thing taking a play on either madness, freedom or um richness and doing a little bit of a twist on it in the stoic way. Yeah. And I think this follows from the first two paradoxes you know virtues of soul good virtues what's required for happiness along with this play on you know the nature of wealth nature of riches you know once you've internalized the first two then it's clear that uh the kind of riches that matter are not is not held in possessions. It's a good point because one way you would criticize this idea about the person who wants nothing is you would say it's well it's kind of a defeist attitude, right? Like you stop caring about anything to have freedom from pain. And you can kind of level that criticism against the Epicurans who try to argue that potatoes and stew are just as good as lobster and steak. But that seems almost hypocritical within their, you know, conception that pleasure is the point of life. But when Stoics say that virtue is the point of life, well then the wise person has the good things. So the wise person both wants nothing else and has the good things. And so they they've achieved this state of genuine richness. They haven't just like retreated from the world, which I think is yeah, it's an important distinction. Yeah, I think so. In some ways, this this paradox is one of the easier ones to understand. But perhaps it does it is open to that almost defeist type of objection still where you think you know if you're being made fun of for not having uh enough money not being wealthy enough and you say well you know only you know really only the wise are rich or something like this as a comeback it's not a not exactly completely persuasive or it does have a little bit of a flavor of rationalization. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's the that's the kind of catch 22 for the Stoics, though, right? If you're Senica, well, easy for you to say Senica, you've got all your money. And if you're not Senica, if you're kind of, you know, a normal person and it's like, okay, you're kind of just rationalizing. You're rationalizing that. It's like it's hard to take it. They get sto get kind of stuck where they don't get taken seriously either way. Yeah, that's right. That's right. And maybe there there is um some practical upshot here. is that apherism, you know, it's easy to be a stoic in failure. One way to interpret that is, you know, you can rationalize your stoicism. Uh, and in in this way we just did, you know, well, if your business fails, it's not business that really matters. Um and uh maybe the the sort of a practical upshot to that is to be careful about rationalization in defeat from one direction but then also of course in success be careful of sort of like the non- stoic I suppose flavor of that where you know you become like the epicus is a man who values uh himself because of properties of his horse as opposed to who he is. So maybe that's the practical a practical related practical upshot from this paradox. Yeah, I agree. I mean, you don't want to become the person who in success, you don't want to become the person who prides themselves in the things that aren't really theirs anymore than you want to be the kind of person who who, you know, says stoic things without really having internalized them or worked on them either because, you know, you're trying to sound, you know, fancy and profound or something like this. Um, so that takes us to the end of our six stoic paradoxes. Not too bad. Um, I think that we we kind of really wrestled in the middle there with three and four. So again, those are one, virtue is the soul good. Two, virtue is the sole requisite or you know the only thing um necessary for happiness. All good deeds are equally virtuous and all bad deeds are equally vicious. Number three. Number four, all fools are mad. Five, only the wise are rich or sorry, only the wise are free, excuse me, whereas all fools are enslaved. And six, only the wise are rich. So in terms of themes, we we hit on this through the course of our conversations, but the two things I wanted to pull out, a lot of these paradoxes, the last four in particular, rely on this quirk of stoicism where they really like to talk in absolutes. We kind of clarified that's maybe this tradition of early stoicism which Cisero is responding to like Zeno Chrysopus that Cicero is responding to. But these ideas like they have this idea that the sage is perfectly wise. Everyone else is equally ignorant. That was that metaphor about drowning. And then when you when you believe that you think about that not in a spectrum but in a a binary then you know all bad deeds are equally vicious because you know everybody's equally drowning. All fools are mad. They're all mad in the same way. Only the wise are free because, you know, you can't have somebody who's partially free or mostly free or somebody who's not quite a sage but is free and only the wise are rich. It's just these it's these I guess it's really the onlyies there, the only part or the all part is doing a lot of work. Uh all all fools are this only the wise are that. And that's coming from this stoic tendency to think in absolutes that we saw in early stoicism. you lose a bit by the time you're at Marcus Aurelius because I think as as you were pointing out just like you know pre uh we've we've lost that I think just taking a more practical focus by that point and then I just think it's interesting for a school that places so much emphasis on progress that the way that they conceptualize virtue is binary either you have it or you don't this is not a unique criticism of stoicism but it's something I wrestle with in my own it's almost like that that that black and white thinking is something that just almost just ignore because I don't find it helpful for my own progress. I don't find it like conceptually maybe it's this reminder to like not finish until you get there. Like there's not really a good enough and you're like, "Oh, I'm, you know, I'm pretty good at doses. I'm going to stop." Maybe that's a practical function of it. But otherwise, I can find it like really demotivating if I think about it. It's not really helpful to me. Yeah, I think it can have practical uses as you say sort of you know this constant focus on improvement perhaps but even there it can be difficult to make sense of that even that very idea of improvement on uh the binary approach but you know perhaps can it can be motivating you know just be virtuous in the moment that's all you need all you need to do uh perhaps and I think there's also the idea to uh be careful about judgments of others that that can come through. You know, if if all you know, vicious acts are really just that vicious, then there's not perhaps as much point to be drawing all these distinctions between yourself and others or between, you know, other people and uh your friends and so on. So, you mean like a kind of like elitism like, oh, I'm better than them, you know? Well, the stoic would say, well, you know, you're all kind of still fools. Yeah. Is that is that that's what you mean? Yeah. I think just like that, you know, Senica has that line about him being in the hospital bed next to uh you know, everyone else. And I think that's, you know, I suppose that's that kind of uh reminder about one's position in that sense. So perhaps that's I think that can be something that one can think about especially that that third paradox which is which is quite challenging you know that all wrongs are just that wrong. So, uh, cool. But, uh, yeah, thanks for putting this together and, uh, send in any questions. Let us know what your favorite paradox is. And, uh, tune in next time. Thanks, Go. All right. Thanks, Michael. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at Stoa Stoaitation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
