---
title: "The Stoic Fragments: Hidden Wisdom from Epictetus (Episode 182)"
slug: the-stoic-fragments-hidden-wisdom-from-epictetus
episode_number: 182
youtube_id: l3sJU3tU91o
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l3sJU3tU91o
upload_date: 2025-05-06
duration: 46:40
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stowa Conversations. My name is Caleb Monttoveros and I'm Michael Trombble and today we're going to be talking about some of the fragments from Epectitus. We've talked about the discourses, talked about the handbook and touched on a handful of fragments here and there, but uh not spent too much time. So, we Michael pulled out some highlights. I pulled out some comments as well and we'll uh we'll go through a few of them. Yeah, I'm excited for this one. I mean, I'm excited whenever we talk about Epictitus. Um, but so for those that aren't familiar, um, when you're looking to get into Epictitus, you want to read some of his works, you can often purchase in one copy everything we have existent of his writings. And that's the the discourses, the handbook, and then the fragments. And the I said writings, but I should say the discourses is maybe a transcription of those lectures. probably some alteration by Aryan. The handbook is then a summary. So kind of your your greatest hits if you will, the key concepts, the study notes. And then on top of that, you've got the fragments um which are pieces of Epictitus either quoted or preserved by other writers that no longer exist in the remaining discourses or handbook. So for example, uh fragment 9 um is from Alis Gelas, I think that's how you say his name. uh his book Attek Knights. So that's like a also um you know 3rd century AD uh book, but it references a stoic philosopher citing book five of Epictitus's discourses. And so you know the philosopher pulls out the book and says I'm going to read you this passage from book five of Epictitus and we only have the discourses only has four books. So this points to like some of the content of the fragments presumably is from additional books that we've lost. You know, parts of Epictitus' thinking that were shared and spread around in in in his time that we don't have anymore in the handbook or the discourses. Um, I was excited to do this episode because I hadn't actually read that much of the fragments. I I I didn't actually dig into them in that much detail. I think because it can feel like they're I mean they're a little bit less certainty in their authenticity or a little or some of them maybe are paraphrases along or you know other philosophers talking about what Epictitus said. So from a scholarly perspective when I was really digging into Epictitus there's a little bit less um certainty or confidence in the authenticity of of the thought or the representation of the thought. But I I think they're a great supplement to Epictitus' thinking, and there's not something that I've thought about much or talked about much. So, I thought it would be fun idea for an episode to go through, read the the fragments carefully, and then each talk about some of our favorites um or some key ideas that popped up that uh we thought were cool. And so, for this, I'm using um Robin Hard's 1995 translation of Epictitus, and that has 36 fragments. I know something you talked about, Kale, when you were preparing for this episode, some translations have more, some have less. Maybe speaking to further research on the authenticity, like Robin Waterfield's translation you were saying has less. So maybe maybe there's an argument there that some of them have been shown to be less trustworthy than others. I'm not sure. I'm not sure his reasoning, but that's the one those were the ones that I was uh reading from and using. Yeah, absolutely. I think uh the fragments they do have uh for some of you who are maybe more familiar with Epictitus or this podcast there there are some famous lines from Epictitus that come from the fragments I think you know that line about persisting and resisting I believe that's a fragment uh fragment if I'm mistaken fragment 10 yes that's fragment 10 well because when I was when I wasn't really into epictitus and I was like why is everyone talking about persist and resist I was like where is this coming from I've been I've been reading the discourses back and forth and I he does not talk about persist persisting and resisting. I was very confused but no you're exactly right. This is where that comes from. Yeah, absolutely. Uh it's cool to see how other writers Marcus Aurelius picks out uh ideas from Epictitus. I think there's something to be said for the fragments since they are selections done by other writers, philosophers and such. you know, out of anything they could have picked from Epitus, they decided to choose these lines and they were fortunate enough to have more of a wider selection to choose from. So, you know, as you as you were saying, we don't have the complete set of discourses anymore. It's been lost. So, we get a at least a a teaser of what what could have been perhaps. [Music] Yeah. Good to jump into it. Yeah, let's do it. Cool. So for the structure for the episode, I'm going to take a some of the fragments are longer than others. Like fragment makes some of them sound small. Uh some actually ignore up to a page, other are just a line. But I'm going to basically quote from either the entire fragment or the portion of fragments I think are the most interesting. And then we'll uh reflect on the idea a bit. So pull out the key idea and now I talk about either maybe maybe how it's surprising or maybe how it reinforces some of the other ideas of Epictitus. So kicking things off with fragment seven. This says quote, "It's the part of a thoroughly mean-spirited and foolish man to suppose we shall be despised by others unless by every possible means we harm the first enemies we come across. For we are inclined to say that a man can be recognized as contemptable by his incapacity to do harm. But he is much better recognized as such by his incapacity to be of help. So that's the quote. I thought that was a really interesting one. To summarize that in less maybe oldtimey language, Epictitus is basically saying, uh, it's dumb to to despise people because of their incapacity to hurt or harm other people. We we we should judge somebody by their incapacity to be of help. And I think you're getting here, you know, my summary of it on it is that, you know, it's it's better to value the person that can help their friends than value the person that can harm their enemies. I think we're getting here also some maybe some ancient conceptions of masculinity where people were valued of, you know, well, what capacity do you have to go out and maybe exert your will on others or to dominate others if need be? And Epictitus is is kind of taking a bit bit more of a pacifist line here and saying, look, we we we shouldn't judge somebody as being a bad man, I would say, because they can't harm other people. we we should judge the bad men by people who can't help their friends basically. Um, which is an interesting thought. I I thought that was like a I mean, Epic Tetus is normally known for being pretty hard, uh, pretty intense in his stoicism, and this was kind of an interesting, it's a pacifist angle. Exa, it's not exactly that, but it was kind of a more, you know, let's focus on raising other people up than our capacity to pull other people down. Um, yeah, which which which stood out to me. What did you think? Yeah, it's a good one to call out and I think you're right that it's a rejection of other forms of masculinity. What this first brought to mind to me was what was inscribed on the Roman uh we could say Roman dictator, Roman generals um tombstoneah which was no friend ever served me and no enemy ever wronged me whom I have not repaid in full. That line goes hard. That is that's a that is a good line though. Yeah, which one must admit is an absolute banger, a great line. Uh, but I suppose what you know, Epictitus is saying here is what really matters is the friendship aspect and of course there's some amount of navigation one needs to do with respect to one's enemies. But you know the example of cella prescriptions and such I take epitus to really be rejecting here is that's um that's not required you know to be excellent. It's it's much more important to be to help one's friends than harm one's enemies. Yeah I think that's exactly right. So it's like judge the person who hasn't repaid their friends don't judge the person who hasn't repaid their enemies. Like that's a maybe as you said maybe you know you've gota you've got to kind of navigate the world and people that are trying to harm you and uh you know hold your boundaries and stand up for yourself but we should be more judgmental of the person who who doesn't do right by their friends than the person who doesn't you know get vengeance on their their enemies in the way we might suspect or um expect of them in this kind of Roman society. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. Epictitus would think, you know, what Marcus Aurelius did with forgiving people who attempted to launch coups against him was the right sort of move where you have you put forward a kind of practical forgiveness uh as as an option. It's not necessarily the you know the stance that oh someone is acting as aggressor towards me. I need to squash them, you know, or uh something of this sort. Yeah. And then I guess the last part is just the like so that stands true as like better to be that than the other thing. Like better to be better to be the person that repays his friends than the person who punishes his enemies. But then he's also just calling out which we've spoken to, but just that last time is he's he's um he's calling out this kind of actual social tendency to value one over the other. like he's pushing back against um a norm of of uh valuing one over the other. And I think that's a good it's a good reminder um I guess what we value when we look at others. Yeah, I suppose. Yeah, that's true. That is a good reminder. I suppose you can also take this in a political context if you like. You might maybe value politicians more by their ability to help their constituents than crush their constituents enemies and so on. So I think that might be there's some practical upshot there for sure. Yeah. Cool. So, moving on to the next one. This is fragment 10. And so, this is uh just a a portion of it, but it goes, Aryan said that Epictitus noticed a man who had lost all sense of shame, who had misguided energy, bad habits, was self-confident, and relied on his power of speech, and concentrated on everything except his moral character. Epictitus saw that a man of this kind was also tackling philosophical subjects and methods. He would attack this man in these words. Man, where are you putting these things? Look careful to see if the jar is clean. If you put these things into your mind, they're ruined. If they rot, they become urine or vinegar or perhaps something worse. So, the idea here is we've got this guy, he's not doing super well. Um, he's he's he's not living philosophically. And then he goes and he starts studying philosophy. And then Epictitus makes this metaphor about look you're you're taking you're taking these concepts these good concepts and you're storing them in yourself. But you know you're you're the jar but the jar is not clean. And so the things they rot inside of you they become urine or vinegar. The the philosophy becomes tainted. You're not a right receptacle of it. Um so you corrupt the ideas instead of them helping you. I thought this was an interesting one because Ectitus is returning to this idea of needing to study philosophy in the right way, needing to approach it from the right direction. He talks also in the discourses he uses the metaphor consistently of digesting philosophy. You know, be sure not to show off your philosophy. Don't don't brag about your philosophy. Otherwise, this philosophy that you've eaten, you'll you'll vomit it up. you need to just like you need to just let it sit and digest it. And so here we have this other metaphor of you know you're not philosophy is not this inherently good thing. I guess I should say that you know virtue is inherently good almost philosophy is like an indifferent or philosophical maxims are like an indifferent in that maybe they benefit you maybe they don't depends on how they're engaged with. And so you need to be in the right mindset. You need to approach philosophy the right way. Otherwise you you taint this otherwise useful thing which is just a a great reminder. It's one of Epictitus's key ideas and he provides another metaphor here um to add to the list. What did you think? Yeah, it's a it's a cool metaphor and I ISUS of course is so good on that theme of you know embodying your philosophy not merely regurgitating maxims or show what you've learned in your actions not by quoting Chrysopus and so on. Maybe there's there's so there's also that that new idea that you called out that you know think of yourself as a container of philosophy and I suppose that that brings to mind that there are you know some philosophy is useful at other times or maybe you're not always as a container ready for certain aspects of the philosophy. You know, we were talking about skill acquisition the other day and you were thinking, you know, you can think about if you're trying to if you're beginning to acquire a skill, sometimes there's that temptation to go after shiny, more advanced concepts or what have you. Um, and uh, but that's often not the best approach. So, sort of a reminder to, you know, look at your own character, look at the basics before you dive into, you know, chrisipus and logic or what have you. That's another cut on it. Yeah, I think that's exactly right. And we're stronger than just like stoic maxims or theory. It's not like, oh, you've got this terrible person and they're they're not engaging in philosophy authentically or genuinely, but I, you know, here's this great oneliner. Oh, okay. Everything's good now. My this this epiphany has revealed to me the truth. It's not really that way, right? You'll take it in, you'll distort it, you'll corrupt it to your own ends, you'll use it to justify, you know, people that use stoicism to justify clearly non- stoic things. The same way you could see that in any sort of philosophy or religion. We have a capacity to envelop or overpower the philosophy if it's not if it's not approached properly. Yeah, absolutely. I that's a great point. I suppose you have that idea almost that uh it's not the exact same but I think there's a related idea of some concept Christian conceptions of sin. Uh I Martin Martin Luther talked about incurvetus say which is sort of just fancy Latin for curving inwards. you know, the tendency to come up with maybe even a good idea, a good character change, but there's that human tendency to curve in on itself, to turn that good idea into maybe a selfish one or something that benefits oneself. And he and he talked about this in the religious circumstance, but you also see it in the philosophical case. I think even if you have some idea or personal change uh that you make an idea that you implement improve your character in some way there's still always that tendency to curve back uh to oneself as it were to misuse it and that's something one always needs to be on guard against. Yeah. Or uh as Epictitus would say turn it into urine or vinegar. Neither good things. Neither are good things. It's also it's also worth calling out from this uh that this is the fragment where um persist and resist or bear and forebear comes from and I was thinking maybe we should read it briefly in case uh someone's not familiar with with this uh it is something that we've quoted others quote before these two lines. Epicus used to say that there are two vices that are much graver and more hateful than all the others. Namely, want of endurance and want of self-control when we are unable to bear and endure the wrongs that we ought to bear and cannot hold back from those pleasures and other things that we ought to hold back from. And so he said, if someone can take these two words to heart and use them to govern and control himself, he will be free from fault for the most part and live a most peaceful life. Those two words he used to say are bear and forebear. So that's uh the Robin Hard translation. Yeah, that's I I've never thought of that before in terms of I mean when you when you when you put it like that um my my translation is slightly different but uh I have like put up with things and to control oneself. It it seems to me to be then desire and aversion, right? Like it seems to me to be you've got to control your desire and you've gota so that's self-control and you've got to put up with things and that's controlling your aversion. So that's like your your fear and and your desire and when you cuz I think that's the issue I always had with bear and forebear is it never really connected to me. I was like, it rhymes. Like the another one is persist and resist. Like these these they rhyme. Like I'm not understanding what the where this connects with Epitius's philosophy. But now that I think that it not to be dismissive of it because I know a lot of people like that line, but um now that it connects back to those I guess are the opposite of you know poor uh desire and aversion, right? It's like persisting. Persisting is you can put up with when your mind is saying, "I don't want to do this. This is scary." And resisting is is saying when your mind's tempted, you know, "Oh, isn't that that thing is shiny? Oh, maybe you should go for go for this thing you desire." And I I I really like that. Makes sense to me now. That connects. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's really helpful. I don't actually know where this fragment comes from. Do you? No, I don't. Yeah, it just begins. I have heard Favinus say, "Who is this Favarinus?" I don't know. Well, it's it's clearly it's one of those fragments that I I mean, I'm sure we could find out, but it's one of those fragments where it's um you know, yeah, talking it's not a quote that was quoted. It's like talking about what Epictitus used to say. It's commentating on Epictitus' philosophy. So, somebody who's read presumably a part of Epictitus, we've lost Cool. Nice. Um, anything else on fragment 10? No, that's all I got. So, now moving to fragment 13. Um so in this one um Epictitus is talking to a student upset that terrible people are successful or you know that terrible people seem to go unpunished by the universe and it seems kind of unjust that bad people could be in position of power you know successful business people politicians uh people basically succeeding despite the bad things they've done and Epictitus says the man who blames providence because the wicked are not punished ed but are strong and rich is doing much the same as if when they had lost their eyes. He said they had not been punished because their nails were sound. I for my part say there is much more difference between virtue and property than there is between eyes and nails. So in plain language, Epitia's point, the person's point here is like what kind of providential the Stoics claim the world is providential. You know, it's unfolding towards a a a plan, a kind of good state of affairs. And then the person says, the students ask what kind of providential world sees bad people succeed, get in positions of power, um become strong and rich as as Epictitus says. And Epictitus is like, you know, you getting mad about that, they've literally had the worst thing happen to them. They're a bad person. If you're a stoic, you think they they've had the only bad thing there is happen to them. They're experiencing being a bad person. And you're complaining because they have accumulated these preferred indifference. And he's like, that's doesn't make sense. The awful character is its own punishment. that they've already been punished. And that's the analogy between the eyes and the nails. It's like complaining that person who's had their eyes plucked out has nice nails. And it's like, what part of that is supposed to be unjust? They've clearly already been punished. I ended up doing like a a solo podcast um on this topic because this fragment really stood out to me. But it's this I think it's this nice litmus test for how much we've internalized stoic values because I think often we can you know let's say I don't get that promotion or I don't get that raise or um you know a group of people don't like me sometimes you can use stoicism in the way niche would criticize it which is like you're trying to shrink from life and you're like well those things didn't really matter anyway those are just like preferred indifference it doesn't I don't really care. You're kind of like post talk using stoicism to justify or or reduce the pain of your own disappointment. And I think if you've really internalized stoicism, you can tell by how well you apply those judgments to people outside of yourself. So you see somebody you see somebody you know succeed and you're happy for them but you're not like elated for them or you see you know a bad person get into a position of power and you go well they have to live with themselves you know like they have I'm not jealous of them. I wouldn't want to be them. Um and I think that they're they don't have a good life fundamentally. Like you really believe they don't have a good life. And I think that's a a pretty profound thought, but but one that's hard to do. Yeah, certainly hard to internalize. And I do think you're exactly right that it's a useful test to how deeply one has understood some of the stoic ideas. Your explanation also like fully uh brings the beginning of the fragment to life, which I like as well. It begins with but I see the good and virtuous someone says dying from hunger and cold but don't you also see that those who aren't good and virtuous dying from luxury pretention and v vulgarity is epictitus's response and then it continues into the section you read and I think that's just to emphasize the uh the point you made which is for the stoics you know success and indifference obviously isn't the uh ultimate meaning of success in life. You know, that's not what one ought to be pursuing. And as such, you know, the thought that the world is unfair, feelings of envy, jealousy, and such due to other success and indifference is is going to be misplaced. Mhm. And I think if anything, if you're going to have some sort of problem of evil in stoicism, it would be something more along the lines of like, so the problem of evil is, you know, if if God is good or is a providential universe, why do bad things happen? And if you're pointing to the evil in the universe as a stoic, you're not pointing to the good people who get sick and die early or something like this. You you've got to point to the bad people and say, you know, what kind of providential universe allows them to become ignorant? What kind of providential universe allows them to lose track of living in accordance with nature? And stoicism maybe has answers to that, but that for the stoicism is the bad thing that's going on in the world. It's the it's the ignorant people. And so to point to them and say, "Well, the world's unjust because of how successful they are, because they're not being thrown in jail enough or because they're not being uh exiled or physically punished." It just is it's it's really counter um even though I I fall into that same thinking all the time. I'm not saying that it's it's a very advanced thing to think. I mean, Epic it's what Epictitus is doing, but um it's it's like an unsto way of thinking about it, right? Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah, in some ways maybe it makes the problem of evil at least as a philosophical problem easier to deal with and than it may be for theists. Of course, that's a that's a bit of a rabbit hole, but that's I think that's worth pursuing. Mhm. All right, what's next? So, next up is fragment 18. A bit of a longer one. So uh this goes they are they are pretty fellows indeed said Epictitus who value themselves on things that are not in our own power. I am a better man than you says one for I have a great deal of land and you are half dead with hunger. I am a consular rank says one. Another I'm a governor another I have a fine head of hair. I I just to pause for a moment. I thought these were just like really funny ways of Yeah. I got I'm rich and you're hungry. Yeah. Well, my hair is really nice. Uh we haven't changed that much. Um so the the quote continues, "Yet one horse does not say to another, I am better than you, for I have a great deal of fodder and all that barley, and I have gold bridles and embroidered saddle." But they say, "I am swifter than you." And every creature is better or worse because of its own virtue or vice. Is man then the only creature that has no virtue of its own? Must we then look to hair and clothes and ancestors? So I mean I think this this is a great line. Um and so ancient Greek teology stoism is based in ancient Greek teology. That just means that we should judge things based on their function or their nature. And that's what Epictitus is saying. Horses shouldn't be judged based on their hair or their saddles but their swiftness. That's the virtue specific to horses. That is where when you when you're evaluating horse excellence, you look at swiftness. You can argue about that. You could say there's maybe we should evaluate horses based on something different. But the the idea is that there is a specific virtue that makes something excellent. We don't judge, you know, there's the that we don't judge a fish's ability to fly. We judge its ability to swim and so on and so forth. So, Epictitus is is just pointing out that we we need to apply this own reasoning to humans and we look silly when we don't do it. We sometimes, you know, when when when we sometimes we we don't acknowledge that we have a virtue that sets us apart and other times maybe we think of that virtue as these shallow things, our career, our hair, um all that land we have. Um but we the fact is we do have a defining virtue according to stoicism. we have something that we deserve to be judged on. It's a way that you evaluate a quality human versus a poor human. And that's how we make use of impressions. It's our character. How well we make decisions with the circumstances we have. And so, um, you know, the same way it's silly to judge a horse by its hair, it's silly to judge a human by its also its hair in Epic's example or, uh, you know, its richness or its its physical strength. you judge humans on their character, on the the quality of their character or their achievement of uh of virtue. Um, and I think that's like I think that teology is sometimes hidden below the surface in Stoicism. And I just love this passage that really pulls out brings it to the forefront. Yeah, absolutely. I honestly don't think I have too much to add to that. I suppose an adjacent one that I pulled out that's just before this. The fragment that's just before this that I enjoyed um that I like is Epicita says when we're invited to a banquet we take whatever is served and if anyone should ask his host to serve him with fish or cakes he would be thought eccentric and yet in the wider world we ask the gods for things that they don't give us irrespective of the many things that they actually have given us. And I suppose that's just another angle on indifference, if you will. You know, it's in some ways we are inclined to take uh you feel like we're responsible for good indifference, a fine head of hair, riches, career success, uh what have you, which to some extent may be true, but in the end of the day, those are just indifference. And then perhaps we we have the opinion that we're owed other things. The the you know the picture of the providential universe or I just like the analogy of you know we wouldn't go over to a friend's house they serve us food and then we say well excuse me I would have actually preferred a a different dish. Um yeah where's the where's the cake? And yeah so I like that analogy and sort of just applying that to the circumstance one finds one in in life in general. So, I think that's a I think that's a fruitful way to look at things. Yeah. I mean, I love this. I love this one because it just I think Epic Titus has a lot of great points about why we shouldn't complain or the kind of mistakes we're making when we get in kind of a complainy mentality. And this is that is just like we all judge the person who goes through the buffet and is like, "Oh, they don't have this." I mean, it's not even a buffet in this case, right? Like, you're not paying. or like you've been invited to a dinner and you're like, "Well, you didn't make the type of cake I like or I prefer fish to meat or something." And and and the the point we're not but we're not being incorrect at the banquet. We're being correct at the banquet. We're recognizing, okay, I've got this opportunity. This opportunity sets a certain set of options. It's my goal to try to navigate that opportunity well and to make the best use of those options. You know, maybe if I can't maybe I would have preferred there to be fish, but I'm going to either eat this and if I can't eat this, then I'll abstain from eating it. You just basically conduct yourself with good decorum. And the idea is we should treat treat our personal fate in the same kind of way. Like maybe I would have preferred this to be differently, but these are the options I have. I'll to make use of some of them. I'll choose not to. I'll I'll choose to forego others, but I won't be angry or bitter about, you know, finding myself in the banquet I found myself in. Absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah, I like that one. Cool. So I've got two or three more here. So moving on to fragment 20. Epictita says, "Those whose bodies are in good condition are able to withstand heat and cold. And so likewise, those whose souls are in the right condition can bear anger and grief and a moderate joy and all other emotions." I like this one because Epictitus, he really likes to make metaphors between philosophy and athletes. That's something I've talked about a lot. I've written about that. I I don't think the point here is that a philosopher should be angry or grieve, but that someone well-trained is in a better position to recover from these. Um, I mean, maybe we can you can interpret it different ways, but I basically I basically think it's this idea that, you know, you can make mistakes if your foundations are solid. So, you know, if you're in good shape, you can withstand some uh you can get a little sick, you can withstand getting roughed up a little bit, you can go for a run and recover quickly. And likewise, you know, if you're if you're if you've got the foundations of your stoicism down, you can bounce back from some anger, some grief, some extreme joy, you can handle these emotions and have them be like relatively less disruptive so that they they don't kind of spiral or don't kind of build into this bigger thing than they need to be. And I just like I like that just another, you know, we're kind of we're preparing ourselves. We're putting ourselves in good condition like an athlete. Why? So we can respond to the things that that pop up. I just I like these metaphors in Epictitus. Yeah, absolutely. I think it puts some color into the idea of a progressor and you can think about, you know, what does progress look like in my case. Perhaps it expecting not to experience anger immediately uh is a mistake and it might be better to think about reducing the intensity of anger. you know, avoiding making foolish decisions while in the grips of frustration and so on. And you know, someone who whose soul is in a better condition, one could say, is is you know, you're moving in the right direction if you're able to deal with negative emotions uh and not experience the, you know, the same kind of negative consequences. So perhaps that's uh that's another a way to make sense of of progress that's uh suggested by this fragment. Yeah. No, I really like that. Yeah. Adding some color to the progressor is a good way to put it. Yeah. Not cure, not invincible, but bounce back a little bit more. A little bit more resilient. Mhm. Um I often think about that in terms of like sport about you know I've been doing some research into like you would know more about this with running than I would but like let's say there's like zone cardio which is basically the intensity of your heartbeat and in in one hand it's almost like an absolute terms our bodies even if you get in better shape you can't handle so like you know even even the person who's in the best shape can't handle a zone five for a long period of time. Mhm. But there's but at a relativistic relatively you know you Caleb who's a good runner is going to be able to run much faster and stay in zone two than I can and stay in zone two. Um, I don't know how much this metaphor is is is going to hold up, but there's this there's this this position of like if you get your body in the right condition, yeah, okay, you know, you're still going to until you're a great stoic, you know, if if a if a loved one dies, if someone spits in your face, like all these things are still going to like get to you, but maybe that only gets you to zone three cardio where instead it would have got you to zone five. And there's almost this like this like uh you're you're yeah you're just you're just subjectively handling the experience differently and with less intensity as you progress instead of like this binary like oh I read the discourses once and now you know nothing makes me angry anymore. It's just like yeah it made me kind of angry but it didn't ruin my year. I didn't become the kind of person who's like I need to now murder this person in revenge. like you know these kind of things like it just it takes a lot to get me there and then a certain point it's like you literally couldn't get me there and and so that kind of dulling over time is is a nice way to think about it. Yeah, I think so. It's almost a you know decide metaphor of efficiency you can apply perhaps to stress or something of this sort you know how efficient are you at dealing with stressors that arise in your environment? Are you are you able like the person who has aerobic efficiency to you know maintain uh yeah a cool head in you know much wider range of circumstance over time if so you're becoming more efficient in a way. Yeah, efficiency is a good way of putting it, right? Like Yeah, like you could probably I don't know. I don't I'm just But you you could you could do a 30 minute 5K and probably stay in zone two and that's fine for you. Whereas somebody else if they if they experienced this if they had to do the same thing or run a 5K in 30 minutes, you know, they'd be puking after. And it's like so it's like objectively the same thing but subjectively a much different experience because of the efficiency improvement. And so that's like a way to look at your stoicism progress is not like, oh, were you perfect, but you know, did it get less of a rise out of you than before? Did you handle it more efficiency? Uh, more efficiently. Um, yeah, definitely. Cool. So, next one is fragment 26. And this goes, you are a little soul carrying a corpse, as Epictitus used to say. Um, Kale, you called out in the notes rightly, that this is from the meditations. This is a Marcus Aurelius fragment. Um, but the one I like about this is that Epictitus, as much as he uses that metaphor of comparing oursel with athletes, and I like the physical metaphors he uses all the time, he's really cautious about identifying us too strongly with our bodies. Our fundamental idea for uh fundamental identity in Epictitus' view is our ability to choose our our mind, our prohibis. Um, this is a reminder of that. Our our our body is a corpse. We are the soul. And so it's like again, it's a very particular use of language about, you know, you're a little soul carrying a corpse. Not with a corpse, not like you you're you're it's almost this baggage you have. And that calls that calls back to me this idea you get in Plato as well of like the body as being this corrupting factor, this limiting factor for the soul. Um I don't know if Epictitus goes that far. I don't know. I don't think he thinks the body is corrupting us, but we have a we have a corrupting tendency to identify ourselves with the body. Uh we want to resist this if possible. Yeah, I think I think Marcus Aurelius sometimes talks about like there's a there's a little more of this corruption idea from the body. The the the Haze translation is nice. A little wisp of soul carrying a corpse. Epictitus. That's uh book 441. Yeah. Again, we get that idea of um caring, right? Like it's this it's this it's not you, it's this possession. Yeah, I think you're you're right to call out that the a number of analogies or metaphors are exceptionally useful. Um but but this line of course it's it's a another metaphor but I think gets at something fundamental to philosophy this view of identity. What are you fundamentally? You know, what are human beings? Essentially, it's that prohibis, our ability to choose, you know, the ruling part, as uh Marcus Aurelius is often translated as saying, that's uh that's what's essential. Yeah, totally. Nice. All right, last one. You got one more? Yeah. On to the last one. So, this is fragment 35. Um, we were calling this out. [Music] Um, some of the some of the translations end around 28. So, mine went all the way up to 35. So, I'm going to include this one, but maybe we'll we'll take a look at why and um why it got dropped and you know whether this one is this one is reliable, but the other ones have come from the consistently reliable sources. This one is no man is free who is not a master of himself. It's kind of piffy. It's it's it's it's it's rather short and to the point. Epictitus was a former slave. So he he liked to make use word play and metaphor around slavery and freedom. You know, he liked to call his students slaves in a way, you know, the irony of that. This former slave calling these, you know, rich upand cominging, soon to be successful Roman citizens um slaves. Ironyheavy statement. Um, and so he on one hand there's this just this this this just just this um significance to this kind of word play, but he also does mean this literally like he's not he's not making it's not a metaphor when he says you're not free unless you're master the master of yourself. He he means this for for Epictitus freedom comes from selfmastery because for Epictitus freedom has a specific definition. And it's the capacity to not be controlled or determined by other people. If you desire something outside of yourself, then another person can determine you by either threatening you with something you want to avoid or tempting you with something you want to have. That comes back to the persist and resist thing. If someone has something you cannot persist or has something you cannot resist, then they are able to control your behavior. They're able to determine you. Mhm. And so for Repictus, yeah, you cannot be free. You cannot be a self-determining person who who decides what you do and acts how you want to act unless you have selfmastery, which means you can persist and resist anything. And so that's a that's a it's a I think sometimes when I hear oneliners like this, my I kind of roll my eyes a little bit and go, "Okay, what does that even mean?" But in Epictita's case, he he actually has like a philosophy behind that which goes no it's not it doesn't just sound cool. It's like I'm actually saying something with that which I'm saying you the only way to be free is to be a master of yourself because freedom requires control of desire and aversion requires the ability for someone else not to determine your behavior. And so in his case, because it's connected with Stoic philosophy, it's actually just a reference to a more profound idea again in with that word play around, you know, the obvious historical context of him being a former slave. Yeah, absolutely. And you can contrast it with perhaps some modern ideas of freedom. You know, you have this idea of negative liberty. You have liberty. You are free so long as someone is not preventing you from doing what you want to do or positive liberty. You're free if you're able to do what you want to do. You have sufficient resources to do that. And I think Epotetus is cutting through both of those conceptions and say that what matters for freedom is selfmasterying. That's that's deeper than say just being prevented from doing what one wants to do or being enabled to do what one wants to do. It's putting a question mark next to what you want to do to begin with and whether that maps up with internal or external reality. And of course, he's uh pushing us to, you know, desire virtue and be averse device. That's ultimately what what matters. And that's that's where freedom is going to be found. Yeah. It's almost like a a happy side effect. It's like it's not enough to just like you you need to want the right things. And it just so also happens that by wanting the right things, you'll be uncontrollable cuz somebody could want the right things. You know, if you had a different conception where you thought, well, money was a good thing. You could want the right thing and then still be controlled. And then you'd almost have to choose between desiring the right things. you'd have to like forsake desiring some good things just for the sake of freedom. you'd almost have this like yeah this this tradeoff like am I free or do I pursue what matters and it's like in stoicism well you can you can only be free by pursuing what matters um and that's like I guess a con convenient fact of the world yep nice cool it's good to go through these if y'all get the chance I think fragments there aren't too many of them worth leaping through and uh it's uh I think worthwhile exercise to sort of explore if you can or think through how do these fragments shorter excerpts map up to the rest of stoic philosophy. I think that's that's worth worth doing because there is I think as you're pointing out none of these are I think oneliners to sort of stand alone. They all have a significant as you know a philosophical and practical background behind them. So I think that's a a worthwhile thing to do to flesh out and then you know come back to the fragment as a almost like a you know this idea of a stoic maxim some a capsule or some something you've used to to capture this larger system and uh remind yourself of it as you go throughout throughout your days and so on. Yeah, totally. Um, I like that idea you just raised of almost like you read the maxims as as like, you know, if I say homework, it's going to make it sound less cool now, but it's like uh it's almost like a little test for yourself of like, okay, do I understand the idea that's behind that maxim? So, both the maxim helps remind me of things, but it helps me uh I need to flesh out of my own mind, in my own words. And in doing that, I think in in your own words is I guess the part that I was thinking about. If you can flesh that out in your own words, then you really do understand the philosophy behind it. Um, but yeah, that was a lot of fun for me. Thanks, Gil. Cool. Awesome. Thanks for putting these together. Thanks for listening to STOA conversations. Please give us a rating on Apple Podcasts or Spotify and share it with a friend. If you want to dive deeper still, search Stowa in the App Store or Play Store for a complete app with routines, meditations, and lessons designed to help people become more stoic. And I'd also like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. You can find more of his work at ancientlar.com. And finally, please get in touch with us. Send a message to stoasttomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback, questions, or recommendations.
