---
title: "The Stoic Case for Introspection (Episode 223)"
slug: the-stoic-case-for-introspection
episode_number: 223
youtube_id: HkFxjmoVtr0
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HkFxjmoVtr0
upload_date: 2026-03-24
duration: 24:19
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Caleb Monteverus. And today it's going to be a solo episode. Today I'll cover a slightly topical issue. A little late, perhaps. Something that came up last week. A uh famous venture capitalist type made a statement on a fairly well-known podcast against introspection. Or at least argued against a kind of introspection. And that kicked off a whole lot of discussion across X and Substack. And uh several of the Stoics' names came up in those conversations. So I thought it might be useful to cover a Stoic take on introspection, as it were, using this as a launching pad. So I won't go into too many of the details on what exactly was said and such, which can of course get distracting. But I'll read a short quote so you get a sense of the flavor of the argument against introspection. And then cover what I think the Stoics have to say against this line of thinking, but also in support of it. So of course not all forms of introspection are equally valuable, beneficial, or perhaps even harmful. The Stoics have a clear method when it comes to thinking about oneself, thinking about one's mind. All right, so here's the quote from the podcast, or a quote from the podcast. All of the modern ideas around introspection and therapy were manufactured in 1910s and 1920s. Great men of history didn't sit around doing that stuff at any prior point. It's all a new construct. First Western civilization had to invent the concept of the individual several hundred years ago. Then for a long time the individual runs and builds things, empires, companies, technologies. And then this guilt-based whammy showed up from Europe, from Vienna, Freud and that movement. The individual needs to self-criticize, feel guilt, look backwards, dwell in the past. It never resonated with me. So that's a quick quote. And we don't need to get into the history lesson about how this stuff emerged, which is uh I mean, it's not too bad of an account, but it's rather coarse. And we do have some thoughts on And we do have an episode on therapy, so I mean, there is this line about both introspection and therapy. We do have an earlier episode that uh Michael put together uh about thinking about therapy. That's episode 191. And And contrasting that with philosophy. But at the very end we get these suggestions about what's wrong with introspection. It involves self-criticism, feeling guilt, looking backwards, dwelling on the past. These are implied to not be good things. And then there's a sort of this there's a historical case. The idea that great men didn't do these things, therefore they're not uh not any good. And of course the common response to this is that uh you know, great men did do these things. And Marcus Aurelius is someone's name who came up in a number of retorts. His Meditations must be described as introspective, at least at some level. And uh it's would be hard to count one of the five good emperors out of the list of great men, so whatever that means to to you, uh Marcus Aurelius should probably be on that list. So then you have a counterexample to this argument, at least the historical side of it doesn't fly. But of course there's the question, I think the natural next move if you're sympathetic to this line against introspection is to define what we mean by introspection and say, "Well, Marcus Aurelius didn't do these sorts of things that were brought into popularity by psychoanalysis and then seeped through the rest of culture into something perhaps more focused on the individual, more therapeutic in the broad sense. And that just of course brings up the issue that I'd like to cover about what is introspection for the Stoics. And of course it involves many different aspects, but if we look at this list, you know, the individual needs to self-criticize, feel guilt, look backwards, dwell on the past. You know, you could say the Stoics aren't interested in a quarter of those projects. The Stoics in no interest in cultivating guilt. That's really more of a Christian emotion. Ancient Stoics don't talk about this too much, although there are some lines about remorse and such. And they have even less concern about looking backwards, dwelling on the past, except perhaps in as a matter of, you know, reviewing your day. You know, the Seneca's evening review. Uh but that entire project doesn't involve dwelling. It's uh forward-looking. You know, reviewing your day in the same way that some of these venture capitalist companies might engage in quarterly reviews or something of this sort. So I it's hard would be hard to press to say that's a a practice that involves too much rumination. Uh but I do think the Stoics in are engaged in self-criticism. Just So to that extent, and Marcus Aurelius certainly does. So I'll list some examples later, but the Stoics are involved in what someone might think of as a negative form of introspection. They are involved in judging oneself. That's one aspect that's essential to the Stoic practice. And they're also, of course, deeply engaged and they encourage their students to know themselves. And in that respect, they are in the uh firmly within the uh philosophical Greco- Roman, certainly the Greek side of that. They're well within that tradition. And perhaps that's a point that also puts some question marks next to the uh little history lesson we had in the opening quote from our venture capitalist. But the uh They I mean, this project just involves knowing yourself, knowing where you fit. Um so that's a matter of knowing your character, understanding your mind, and especially important for the Stoics, the judgments you are making about yourself and the world at large. So that's what Stoic introspection is. And we see Marcus Aurelius practicing both of these, especially self-criticism. So he's not interested in looking backwards, dwelling on the past. I mean, he repeatedly calls himself to be present. But he does uh certainly judge himself and implies that he's not living up to his own standards. So here's a example of this. Meditations 2.2. You are an old man. No longer let this be a slave, no longer pulled by the strings like a puppet to selfish movements, no longer dissatisfied with your present lot, or shrinking from the future. So there's certainly some implied criticism. And you see I think this is the kind of form the uh judgment you see in Meditations takes. This idea that Marcus Aurelius himself is not living up to his own standards, or implication that he should no longer be pulled by the strings like a puppet to selfish movements. But it is important that this the form this self-criticism takes is protreptic. It's really a exhortation to himself to act better. It's not um not purely negative judgment, but encouragement, motivation to you know, no longer be, in this case, no longer be dissatisfied with the present, no longer shrink from the future. And that's from 2.2, a fantastic and well-known example of the general strategy just takes us in the earlier section 2.1. Begin the morning by saying to yourself, "I shall meet with the meddling, ungrateful, arrogant, deceitful, envious, and selfish. All of these things happen to them because of their ignorance of good and evil. But I have seen the nature of the good and know that it is beautiful and the bad ugly. I have seen the nature of the wrongdoer and know that we are kin, not only of the same blood or seed, but because we participate in the same intelligence and portion of the divinity. I can neither be injured by any of them, for no one can fix on me what is ugly, nor can I be angry with my kin, nor hate him, for we are made to work together like feet, hands, eyelids, and like the rows of the upper and lower teeth. To act against one another is contrary to nature and is acting against one another to be angry and turn away." So here we have a reminder, practical instruction that includes a lot of Stoic philosophy, Stoic principles. This idea of seeing the this idea of seeing other people as they are, not taking on a overly optimistic picture of what other humans are like. And then turning to this question of why people act poorly, it's out of ignorance of the nature of the good. And this Stoic picture about fitting in with others, not in the sense of um not of the sense of purely going along with the herd, but fitting in in a larger picture, you know, essentially by nature we are made to work together, to live well with others. And that uh and that demands being prosocial. Demands justice, of course. To act against one another, to act selfishly, would be antisocial, unjust, and in the deepest sense unnatural. So I think that's a perfect example of the kind of exhortation Marcus Aurelius is engaged in. He points towards acting a specific way and has reminders, principles to encourage that action. We could also say it's focused on thinking a specific way. And um many of the judgments I myself involve him failing to live up to that standard, but also point towards approaching that standard, approaching that idea of a Stoic sage. They're not purely negative judgments, nor does one ever get the sense that they are indulgent. So that's self-criticism, Stoic self-criticism. One way of summarizing that would be it's the project of understanding where you're failing to live up to your own standards, the standards set by nature, and then exhorting yourself to do better. The other aspect of Stoic introspection, it's not necessarily even uniquely Stoic as I suggested earlier, is this aspect of knowing yourself. You of course you have the famous Delphic maxim, "Know thyself." Here's a characteristic line from Epictetus. This is Discourses 2.11. "The beginning of philosophy, at least to such as enter upon it in a proper way and by the door, is a consciousness of our own weakness and inability in necessary things." A more modern translation of this, believe this is from The Practicing Stoic, is the beginning of philosophy is an awareness of one's weakness and incapacity when it comes to the most important things. This is a familiar idea. Philosophy begins when you recognize that you're failing to live up to your own standards. It's not necessarily a therapeutic one and goes beyond self-criticism uh because it involves awareness of your own mind, your character, and then the next step is defining what that standard is and how you can come to meet it. And although of course there are, at the universal level, the broadest level, commonalities between people, people are different and therefore what it means to live an excellent life is, when you get down to the details, different for each person. And it's going to involve awareness of your talents, your personality, your social situation, and these are facts where introspection isn't the only ingredient. Of course doesn't just involve knowing your own mind about your mind, but of course introspection can be useful for understanding your strengths, limits, and such. That's a crucial part of this project. So, introspection can serve these two main kind of roles, self-criticism and knowing yourself. And if we want to go a little deeper, what is it about introspection exactly that helps you fulfill these? It's awareness of the judgments you're making, your decisions, the quality of the life you're leading, and awareness of your what we want to say, personality, character, strengths and weaknesses that are accessible through introspection. Ultimately, another way to think about it is when the Stoics are engaged in self-criticism, there's this idea of self-respect, of becoming worthy of your inner critic. And your inner critic has an image of who you could be. And introspection is at once perfecting this image of who you could be through knowledge of your strengths, weaknesses, personality, and such, and also helping you understand how you fail to live up to that image when you do. And of course pushing you towards matching that image, developing that self-respect. You could think about this almost as idea of a conscience or as Stoics would say, the uh inner demon. Especially uh Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius talk about this. I think it's an essential point here is that this kind of introspection is not rumination, so it would if people who argue against introspection of course argue against things like dwelling on the past. You know, the Stoics have an answer to rumination. The past is no longer up to you, so in your power. And it's the present that is. And that's happening now. You know, Epictetus says the Olympics is now, there's no no more time to set off this project of implementing your principles. And perhaps there's a kind of criticism here of the I mean an an idea a temptation to procrastination that can come from forms of introspection. You know, I'll change my ways once I find some time to set aside a a period of myself a period for myself to reflect on what exactly needs to be done and how I need to change my ways and so on. Stoics remind us Stoics remind us that that time is not guaranteed by any means. But anyway, the time to act is now. You know, there is no special time for performance and training. The Olympics is now. There is no special time to set aside to start practicing philosophy. The time to practice philosophy is now. And of course philosophy is not merely shown in the inner life, but it must be proved. And Epictetus is excellent against this. You know, he has that lovely section from the Discourses where he says uh "They who have merely received bare maxims are presently inclined to throw them up as a sick stomach does its food. Digest it and then you'll not throw it up. Otherwise, it will be crude and impure and unfit for nourishment. But show us from what you have digested some change in your ruling faculty as wrestlers do in their shoulders from their exercise and their diet as artificers in their skill from what they have learned." There's only a risk to introspection. Of course, there's dwelling on the past. There's thinking that introspection is the work. Introspection is you know, thinking about oneself, taking time for self-care or whatever is the work. But of course, Epictetus reminds us there must be some result of this thinking. Otherwise, what's the point? There's also the slightly more subtle risk where where introspection has I think diminishing returns might be one way to put it. Even when it comes to ways in which it can potentially be useful, say learning about your personality, these sorts of uh the practices. Or even thinking about self-judgment because you know, like you can judge a decision you made and accurately label as a mistake. And then that's another kind of judgment. Thinking about that decision as a mistake. And then you can start pondering about that judgment itself. And this process could just go on and on. So it can become a hallway of mirrors as one uh commentator put it. And uh at some point you're it seems to me one can become detached from reality either because of becoming too meta or the information you're considering is too internal. Maybe even manufactured in some respects. You know, introspection might have a tendency to conjure up images. In the extreme, even falsify memories. So the those risks are certainly there. And I I certainly think it's true that the share of time, the amount of time you spend, say, cultivating awareness of your own mind, the optimal amount of time you spend in this activity fluctuates throughout your life. And it's not one can't spend too much time doing it. I mean, that's certainly true. There's diminishing returns on in anything. Uh so, that's something to keep in mind. And there's always the worry that uh you know, simply contemplating oneself is uh becomes a bit narcissistic. Or it's a way to put off what needs to be done and such. All that said, that you know, the share of time spent thinking about oneself, engaging reflection, the ideal amount of time for most people is certainly not zero. And even though one might think about it negatively, there's a positive role for self-judgment, self-criticism, especially when it's future-facing, exhorting yourself to act better, and filling out this image of who you could be, and getting closer to that picture day by day. All right, let me know what you think. Thanks for listening.
