---
title: "The Roman Socrates Tells Us How To Live (Episode 219)"
slug: the-roman-socrates-tells-us-how-to-live
episode_number: 219
youtube_id: ie_HWD8LHIg
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ie_HWD8LHIg
upload_date: 2026-01-20
duration: 53:51
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Michael Trombble >> and I'm Caleb Otteros and today we are doing Masonius Rufus round two. We are back. We've back to the teacher of Epictitus, one of the one of the historic philosophers. We have a lot of his remaining writings. Um interesting interesting guys. We'll see moving forward. But we wanted to take this time to dig back into some of his of his thoughts. We did an earlier episode of Mason Rufus. I've went through and and reread all of his all of his writings or his existent remaining writings um or collections of of his lessons and speeches and back with some more summaries of insights or ideas that he shared. It's always useful to go back. We did that earlier episode and I recommend anybody to to go and listen to that as well. But we came out with some key themes that are really the most obvious ones that jump out when you read Masonius Rufus. These ideas of the emphasis on practice above theory. We've talked about physical training and that importance that that has for personal development and his kind of egalitarianism or his focus on this idea that women should study philosophy and should practice virtue. And I kind of went back through his writing with a challenge to see well can I push myself a little bit further? Does anything else new come out on a second reading? And I've come back with some some other lessons or themes from his writing. Any other context you wanted to add before we jump into it? Well, I think Wonius Rufus, if you think about the big three of Roman stoicism, of course, it's Marcus Aurelius, Epictitus, and Senica, but Monius Rufus is certainly up there and in part perhaps just doesn't make that list because what we have from him are a shorter selection of discourses and uh you know, that's it. You know, if you imagine you only had a single book of Epictitus Epictitus' discourses, perhaps we wouldn't rate Epictitus as highly or perhaps we wouldn't depending on the book. But, uh, we certainly don't have as much from him, but that doesn't mean he's not worth reading by any means. And he has several, I think, unique attributes that make him uh, worth reading. And of course, he's a teacher of Epicitus. So, it's good to see that that thread in action. >> Yeah, that's a good way of putting it. It's like we have one if we had one or two chapters of Marcus Aurelius's meditations, you'd probably still see people talking about it, but when you have a larger body of writing, themes emerge more clearly. There's obviously more ideas being shared. So, there's more goodness if the writing is good, but you you get these these reoccurring themes, these motifs, these ideas. And what we have from Masonius Rufus, if people are interested in reading him, we've got really 60 to 80 pagesish depending on the translation or addition you have of recordings of his lessons, things that he he taught or said, um places that he was mentioned elsewhere like Epictitus mentions him because he was Epictitus' teacher and Epictitus' um educator and stoicism. But yeah, I think I don't think there's I don't think he's worse. there's just less less writing there and then maybe a bit less historical relevance compared to a Senica or Marcus Aurelius who people maybe read them they come at those figures and a Cicero from a historical direction as well they're just interested in what those famous people thought and said but really enjoy his writing and we'll get into this in a moment but it's a good it's a good read for somebody who's already persuaded about stoicism. Somebody who's the practicing Stoic, I would say, because that's who it's written for. That's who it's intended for. It's it's written for his students. It's written for people that he's trying to teach. I I I keep saying written. These are these are, you know, um recordings of lectures or speeches he's given, but he's giving it to people to students of Stoicism. There's not that many arguments in his writing for stoic points. They're almost taken for granted. And then it's like, what's the implication of those? you know, if those things are true, how do we practice them? How do we put them um how do we fit them into our lives is what he tends to focus on. And as we'll see in a moment, he's also really, I would say, stylistically unique because he provides very pragmatic or specific advice, you know, advice about marriage or divorce or sexual intimacy, ways that you should act as a man or a woman. He he gets he gets very specific in a way that sometimes sometimes I feel the appeal to stoicism is that it's very broad and so if you learn something like the dichotomy of control by Epictitus anybody could be like oh that's great I'll take that I'll add that to my toolkit we've talked about this Caleb this this almost like toolkit analogy and masonics rufus doesn't he's less about the toolkit it's less about these philosophical insights that apply to anybody and more this is specifically how you should live and we'll get into some of those examples and I think some of those are controversial because you know if you disagree with Masonius Rufus do you disagree with stoicism or do you just disagree with Masonius Rufus and that's fine because you you'll you'll almost certainly disagree with at least one of the things that he you know recommends or says with with just as much as con conviction as he says that virtue is the only good. So with that I I'll jump into it unless there anything else to add. >> No, that sounds great. >> Great. So, as I said, I went through we we've hit on a bit, but who is Masonius? Just as a reminder, born in maybe 20 to 30 AD in um central Italy, north of Rome, gained fame in Rome as a stoic teacher. Taught Epictitus, was eventually banished from Rome, multiple times actually, depending on who who the who the emperor was and their relationship with philosophers, but but taught people how to put stoicism to practice. By this point, stoicism had been a philosophical school for 300 years, one of quite some popularity. And so he provides these lectures or lessons on how to put stoicism into practice. And so I've come up with three new themes um from his lessons, three new yeah themes about about what he taught that I want to talk about. First one is philosophical minimalism. Second is what I'm going to call a complicated egalitarianism. And the third is is this theme of just controversial practical advice that I was hitting on really specific advice about how to live. So if we start with philosophical minimalism, we talked in our last conversation Caleb about how Masonius is focused on practice. He's focused on applying stoicism. But when we talked about it last time, Masonius has this way of framing. First you learn the theory, then you put it into practice. Right? It's this two-step process. something that I see in in the writings of Epictitus, but it comes from Masonius. But he he also more than that more than saying, you know, you shouldn't just be a bookworm. You shouldn't just study theory. That should be obvious to anyone listening. More than that, he's almost actually dismissive or I would say philosophically minimalistic or cautious about being too getting too into the arguments or too focused on the complexity of arguments or or thinking that more is necessarily better. So one example is Masonius argues that it's it's better to be persuaded by a few strong arguments than many weak ones. It's better to be a philosopher who has a few really compelling arguments than, you know, a thousand thousands of exaggeration, but 2030 reasons why virtue is the only good. And so, here's a quote here. He says, "The teacher of philosophy should not seek to go through an abundance of words and and arguments for those who are learning, but it should instead speak appropriately about each subject and reach the understanding of his listener and say things which he knows are persuasive and not easily overturned. So he's recommending that we have simple discussions that go straight to our understanding of the world. It's a very Socratic approach. Um he's like when we're when we're making arguments, they should appeal to the intuition of the listener. They should be common sense. They should use language that makes sense to people. And then um then once we've done those and we we've we've made those simple compelling arguments, the second point then shifts to practice. Then we need to act consistently. Has some other quotes here. Only by exhibiting actions in harmony with sound words um will anyone be helped by philosophy. And just as there is no use in medical study unless it leads to the health of the human body, so there is no use to philosophical doctrine unless it leads to the virtue of the human soul. So simple arguments that persuade people, persuade yourself, and then back those up with how you act. Um, and one last piece here is this is this is the advice for the teacher, but it's also the same advice for the student. The student should also uh avoid overly complex theoretical debates. And I have a quote here. Could someone acquire instant self-control by merely knowing that he must not be conquered by pleasure without training to resist them? Could someone become just just by learning that he must love moderation, but without practicing the avoidance of excess? Could someone acquire courage by realizing that things which seem terrible to most people are not to be feared, but without practicing being fearless towards them? So maybe that's not as much a point about complexity as much as it is that original point about we've really got to move out of the realm of the theoretical once we're persuaded, once we find once we agree with the argument and get into the realm of practice. It's not enough to just know. You've got to you've got to put act in accordance with it. as he says. So that's the philosophical minimalism almost skeptical of an overly academic approach to philosophy I would say. Um thoughts on that? >> Yeah, I totally agree. I think one way to sometimes people make this division between the Greeks and the Romans of course seeing the Greeks as more theoretical, the Romans as less cerebral, more practical people. Well, and you can almost think of I think that contrast might be useful here if you think about Monius Rufus as the practical Roman looking to put philosophy into practice as opposed to perhaps Chrysopus who is writing works on logic and such. That's not to dismiss uh the Greeks by any means, but might be a useful mental model when coming at Monius Rufus in particular. And you certainly get the sense that you know philosophy is nothing more than noble action not through Monius Rufus in each of his lectures. I think that's a key stoic principle. It's not just something you get in Monius Rufus but it's something he certainly emphasizes clearly. So um I think that's certainly true. You have philosophical minimal. So that's I suppose there are different aspects to philosophical minimalism, right? you have that focus on action. But the flip side to that or sort of two additional points you're laying out is a skepticism of philosophy is perhaps not the right word. too much abstract reasoning, too much book knowledge you might say. And I think you see this in Monius Rufus' student Epictitus as well who certainly respects uh you know the work of people like Chrysopus but it's scolds his students to you know above all focus on you know showing philosophy not through the chrysipus they've memorized but through their actions right and monious rufus hammers that point through as well in addition I There's a one of my my favorite lectures by Misonius Rufus is there's this point about you know how you should teach philosophy using simple language but I think there's also um a really deep point about evidence and how you should reason in general which is people who are the best thinkers are able to be convinced by the smallest amount of evidence. Uh so another way to put that is you're thinking well if you can make the right decision again and again on the tiniest amounts of evidence. So I think sometimes maybe people think oh good thinking means coming up with a list of 20 pros and cons when in reality you know of course like the the the best thinker would be someone who's able to come to the right decision by recognizing the strongest argument and make following through instead of you know listening through 20 of them. many thoughts, arguments that might be uh more red herrings or rabbit holes than anyone else. You know, they're able to pick out what's important, focus on that, and then move on to the next thing. So, I think there is something uh there is something deep, I think, about the structure of reasoning and arguments there in addition to this uh focus. That's something novel. I think I don't think you see that point as far as I know in other Stoics. Um though certainly it's it's there implicitly I think and the focus on simplicity you know being laconic in your speech but uh it's not always spelled out like that. So I think I think that's that's uh that's that that's pretty cool. And to make it a bit less abstract, the the exact part he's talking about, he's talking about, you know, these stoic arguments around good. Um, I can't remember if it's an example of pleasure or wealth, but you know, you you say well, imagine he's talking to some student and he says, you know, you say wealth is a good thing, but look at these people who come into inheritance. They win the lottery and their life is filled with more trouble. People are coming after them for things. They get um solitary with their because of their money. They get um cynical or um paranoid because of their money. The these are inferences I make. But you you see people make more money and they're not happier and they don't have better lives because of it. And so therefore, you know, money can't be a good. It sometimes harms it harms many people. You know, it harms many people. You've seen that in your own life. And that's an example of a kind of conversation I could have with uh anybody, you know. I could I could have that with any of my friends. I could have that with a stranger. Um and Masonius's point is like that is a much better argument um because it gets right to the root of the matter. Uses plain language. It speaks to people's intuitions um in a way that they they they don't need to be persuaded. they don't need to adopt this like complex alternative worldview. Um, and so that kind of argument is is a much better argument. And I that to me is the kind of Socratic argument of you're pulling out what people already think and you're showing the contradiction what they already think. You tell me wealth is good, but you also tell me, you know, your friend Jimmy uh has a lot of money and he's the most miserable person, you know. So, uh, how do we resolve that conflict? It's that kind of Socratic Socratic strategy that he's really pointing to here as the as the the best way to go about making arguments, which is a good reminder that we don't need to I I you know I don't take my Greek terms from me. I still like, you know, I still like being able to talk about, you know, impressions and prohibis and ascent and things like these, but you know, those are only valuable in so far as I think you can ground them in, you know, specific things that make sense to people that don't require them to adopt this entirely alternative worldview to to make sense of or this complex theoretical system to make sense of first. >> Yeah, that's well grounded. That's a great example. Good. I I think um so you know I think when Rufus would say you know you don't need you think about wealth that's a great example pleasure you know just think about the philosophies that promote pleasure as the end of life just think about the example of unhappy people who are unhappy despite their pleasurable experiences or people you admire is what's written on their tombstone going to be they had the most pleasure or this guy really knew how to have fun or is there something else more valuable and that's sort of simplistic really simple argument gets at you know what's important in life and perhaps you don't need to think so much about some of the more abstuse arguments about epicuranism versus stoicism or hedonic utilitarianism versus you know continism what have you these sorts of things get that get at the root of questions about you know philosophies of life in this case >> yeah well put so that's a good reminder for us um reminder for me at least it's that philosophical minimalism and we're not throwing out philosophy we're doing philosophy but maybe it's a theoretical minim minimalism that might be a better way of putting it um maybe like an aams I don't know if it's a razor but it's you use the fewest amount of words to get your point across and it's probably going to be a better argument if you do um the next theme that came out is this what I'm calling this complicated egalitarianism so the last time we talked Well, Mason Surface is often brought forward as this paradigm of Roman feminism because he argues that women should study philosophy. It's almost this kind of proto feminism where he says, "Hey, you think women shouldn't be here. You think women shouldn't be listening to my lectures, but women have just as much to learn as as uh as you do, right? Like they're also concerned with living well." And that part is is really I think it's interesting. It's really historically interesting. And it shows that kind of egalitarian tendency in the stoics. We see that also in the cosmopolitanism. But and and but we we also get from him something more complicated. So men and women are equal in that sense, but once we get into our other roles, like we're equal as humans, but once we get into our other roles, our other ways of being, we're we're not equal. And so we're equal as humans, unequal in other respects. So in terms of that equality, here's a good quote from Sonius Rufus. He says, "Women have received from the gods the same reasoning power as men. Likewise, the same senses as the male. Likewise too, each has the same parts of the body. In addition, a desire for virtue and an affinity for it belong by nature not only to men, but also to women. Since this is so, why would it be appropriate for men but not women to seek to live honorably and consider how to do so, which is what studying philosophy is? Is it appropriate for men to be good but not women? That's a rhetorical question. So that's that example of that egalitarianism. But um he he he almost does like this role he makes this role ethic play where there we're equal as humans but now now when we think of ourselves as women and men we're not equal and so he follows up here in a later passage perhaps someone says what do you advise men to learn spinning along with women and women to pursue gymnastics along with menia says I am not advising this but I do say that since among humans The nature of males is stronger and of females is weaker. The most suitable tasks must be assigned to each nature with the heavier ones being given to the strong and the lighter ones being given to the weaker. But sometimes when a health condition or circumstance requires it or when opportunity allows it, some men could reasonably undertake some of the lighter tasks and those which seem to be suited for women and women in turn could perform some of the harder ones and those which seem to be appropriate for men. And so what we get here is a kind of common sense account of gender roles. Gender roles exist because of natural physical differences between the sexes. It makes sense to enforce these as general heruristics or rules. And then but it also makes sense to break these heristics when they don't appropriately apply. Um when you have a there's no reason to prevent a particularly strong or physically capable woman from becoming a police officer or a firefighter or something like this. Um, it makes no sense to expect a uh physically weak man to perform physically strong tasks just because of their their gender or their sex. Um, and that being said, a a core philosophical education is the same between both genders, he clarifies. So for both genders, we teach the difference between good and bad, helpful and harmful. We instill a shame towards everything base. We accustom everybody to hard work. We teach them not to fear death and we teach them to be resilient to setbacks, misfortune and failure. So that philosophical education is shared between humans. But then how you go about actually living as a man and a woman uh is actually quite different because of these natural inherent differences between us and those shouldn't be ignored or shouldn't be considered uh shouldn't be not considered or taken seriously. What are your thoughts on that? Yeah, that's well put. I mean, first the statement that um women never receive from gods the same reasoning power as men. Likewise, same senses as the male. I think that gets at the core of it for all people. The Stoics have this egalitarianism. At least all adults are capable of reasoning. That because anyone uh any adult is capable of reasoning, they belong to the same community in some sense. You know, this there's this idea of kinship with every human because they are capable of thinking thinking well because they're capable of virtue. And um that's uh no small thing, right? It's a fragment of the divine for stoics really, this ability to reason. So I think that I think that is a central point Mius Rufus is making here and just draws out the logical conclusion from that which is that everyone then should at some level study philosophy where especially you know he's not imagining everyone you know going to the equivalent of a university and taking a history of philosophy courses. He's thinking about the this practice of virtue, you know, what does it take to be noble in one's behavior. That's what you should study and that's what uh matters for everyone and not not merely the Roman say aristocrats he might be teaching. So I I think that's that's just a fun that's the fundamental point to pull out here. >> Yeah, I think that's the first point and I I agree well well summarized. I think there's that second point where there's this and we'll see this as we get to the practical advice next. There's almost this conservativism to Masonius Rufus which is probably a Roman conservativism where when when I say conservativism I think there's this emphasis on what is natural. There's this emphasis on inherent differences a kind of a natural hierarchy or natural capabilities. There's an emphasis on instead of this idea that oh the the the difference between men and women is a kind of a social construct that uh there's no genuine difference and so any sort of societal difference is a reflection of that social construct and we can change that. It's this view instead that there are inherent differences and so he almost it's not even aggressive argument for why women should study philosophy. It's a still like a naturalistic argument. It's like if you look at the nature of us, our nature as humans is the same. We both have access to reason. We both have access to the spark of the divine. And so we should both study philosophy. But I'm not saying um men should women and men should exercise together or they should play they should be on the same they should be part of the women should be part of the military or men should stay at home and take care of the kids and women go out and do physical labor to make money. Those things are kind of not that is a different role. That's a role as as Epictitus would say, it's one that's like subservient to your human role, to kind of your rational role. It's that specific role you find yourself in because of your body and you find yourself in because of your your natural inclinations, your natural skills. And um those those gender roles are there for a reason. and they should be respected or they should be deferred to and but but also then there's this but part you should then make an exception if the body doesn't back this up. So, if you have a particularly strong woman, if you have a particularly weak man, if you have a a man that has a kind of inclination or skill set that tends to be female coded or vice versa, you you should allow um movement between these basically like there's a natural basis for these, but we should still have some flexibility, I think, is the the quick way of saying it. Um >> I think that's definitely true. So perhaps you don't want to overuse the word minimal here but sometimes some people will say you know the stoics were egalitarian they are cosmopolitan and they believed that you know everyone was capable of reason in some sense they believe everyone has the same moral worth uh and same moral status. Therefore, they were pretty close to liberal people in our day and age. But I what I think what of course the ancient Stoics would not think they would disagree that what many liberals think follows from equality in fact follows their equality really is a minimal picture in a way. Although it's I it's a fundamental to see every human as kin, they thought that was consistent with, you know, of course a hierarchy in the political sphere in the home, not just between men and women, but between the different levels of uh family members, uh slaves in the household. and um they didn't necessarily see that as inconsistent with their otherwise egalitarian type picture. So sometimes it does seem like people make too much hay out of stoic egalitarianism whereas I think perhaps that's a little too quick which is which I think is what you're getting at. I'm just trying to paint this picture that's like it's this it's this kind of middle ground picture where on one view you have you know this is an old Roman philosophy and there's like it's very traditionalist. It's not progressive. It doesn't it's about you know ex accept the society you find yourself in and don't do anything that's socially transgressive. Sometimes it gets presented that way and then other times it gets progre presented as you said of the with this emphasis on cosmopolitanism this emphasis on egalitarianism between all people and it's more of a middle ground and I that that comes into that idea of role ethics with Epictitus which is that we are all equal quah humans we are not equal as soldiers as uh you know parents as politicians as business people as physical physical laborers or workers. There's these kinds of um there's inequalities in our other roles that have to do with either our you know our physical capabilities, our natural talents, our sex, our gender, um things like these. And it's it's this kind of common sense I I think it is almost this common sense middle ground. And there is still this element of being progressive because he's saying we we don't discard those those heruristics. We don't discard the idea that men are typically better at this kind of work and women are typically better at that kind of work, but we we we are willing to break the rule if it doesn't apply in this situation. Um so yeah, closer to the middle than sometimes gets presented. >> Yeah, I think so. And when you put it that way, it sounds totally reasonable. >> It sounds I think so. Hopefully I'm not steel manning it too hard, but it sounds like yeah, we people tend to be inclined to certain types of things because of their talents and skills. But as he said here, right, I like this quote. But sometimes when a health condition or circumstance or circumstance require it or when opportunity allows it, some men could reasonably under undertake some of the lighter tasks and those which seem to be suited for women and women in turn could perform some of the harder ones and those which seem more appropriate for men. That seems yeah very reasonable. Great. So I'll move on to number three. So that is that complicated egalitarianism. I don't know how complicated it is but just this idea of we we are equal as humans but we are not totally equal. Inequalities exist and we have to be conscious of those um and aware of them otherwise we're not living in accordance with nature. The last part I want to fe uh talk about it's not really the the theme is controversial practice of practical advice. It's not one argument. It's a series of things that Masonius Rufus argues for. I think some of them are funny. Um some of them people uh are maybe controversial. I think because they they they're all fall either politically in the modern sense left or right. there's kind of this variety between them. Um, and so be interested if anybody endorses all of them. But it's it's interesting to see what he um endorses and it's valuable because I like to think of that idea of like, well, if I disagree with Mason Rufus here, what part of stoicism do I think he's he's getting wrong? Where do I think he's making a poor argument? Um, and if I agree with him, do I think stoicism supports that or is just at that point just confirmation bias? I just I don't interrogate it because I agree with it. So, I'll go through some of these and then I'll pull out some quotes for the some of them and feel free to stop me if you think um any are worth discussing further. So, one right off the bat which is which is a strange one is he says well not strange but it's it's putting the money where the mouth is. He says a philosopher should never press charges for physical assault because they've not been harmed. And he makes this argument that, you know, a philosopher who thinks it's right to forgive someone who offends him and acts accordingly is obviously better than someone who thinks he must defend himself by filing lawsuits or indictments. So you're you're really failing as a philosopher if you press charges. Um that's so that's that's one that's one argument. Another argument he makes or another practical advice he gives which is one I really like is that physical labor as a type of job is excellent. It's a really good type of work for a philosopher to get into. He says physical labor labor jobs they provide abundant leisure for the soul to do some deep thinking and to reflect on the nature of education. Tasks that don't require excessive physical exertion don't prevent the soul from contemplating the better things and thus from becoming wiser than it was. If a person studies philosophy and farms at the same time, then I would not offer any other way of life to him. Um, I think this is I I like this because it's kind of pushing back against elitism here. So the, you know, the educated man doesn't have to work in politics. The philosopher doesn't have to um be, you know, a successful businessman. If you're if you're able to find a you know a good physical job that gives you freedom of your mind to in today's age listen to podcasts, think about things you've reflected on that that's a good life. Um because you you've got that intellectual freedom. I think about I used to work uh I used to work a job where a lot of it was like folding clothes like a lot of it was was was um it was it was at it was at a university. at my university and I worked in the athletics and PE there there would be these just like large dryer units because my university let people like rent out clothes so you do the laundry and you just like fold fold the laundry from everybody leaving the gym was like it was this job at the athletics facility and I would just crush podcasts and there's a I like my work now but I I really value the intellectual freedom that came from that. Um he obviously says if you he says as well if your if your work is too backbreaking like if it's too difficult then your mind goes into your body your mind goes into the fatigue and that's not good. You need a you need a physical job that's like not too hard so you can you can think and reflect. He's talking about the one where your mind is free. So those are the first two. Another only sexual relations in marriage for the sake of children are appropriate. So he's he's explicitly anti-adultery, um anti- sex out of wedlock, and he's also explicitly anti-homosexuality. Um calls out, you know, samesex relationships as being um it's this appeal to temperance, right? It's like this pursuit of nonproductive pleasure and the the poor self-control. um where instead you should be directing your sexual energy towards the the productive beneficial aspect of raising children in marriage. Um he also says that marriage is about uniting together for the sake of children. He makes an he claims here that abortion is wrong. It's it's it's not it's not an ethical thing to do. And so there are some conservative things, but then he switches over to some things that I would say are less conservative. says it's permissible or even good to disobey your father if he orders you to do something wrong. So it's kind of anti- authority. A disobedient person is one who ignores or disobys orders that are right, honorable, and beneficial. Masonius Rufus says, "So it's not disobedient to refuse somebody in a position of power if they're asking you to steal um or they're asking you to do something that is unethical." Um I might stop there because I got I got a couple more. Any any comments on those first ones? >> Yeah, it's a good set. I think um the one about physical assault is [clears throat] pretty strange initially like why would a philosopher not uh pursue really it almost seems like upholding the law. But I think um the last phrase from that lecture is is illuminating and helpful. So he says, "A philosopher is after all inconsistent if he says that a good man can never be wronged by a bad man, but then while claiming to be a good man, charges that he is wronged by bad men." And I think what he's what he's really getting at in that lecture is the stoic attitude towards insult, whether it's verbal or physical. and that whether or not you press charges after an insult cuz you know you could press charges because someone has harmed your reputation or something of that sort. It shouldn't be done because you believe you've been harmed and that's the classic stoic view. So if there is a I think if you if you it's it's hard to read that as a universal ban. I think you know not pressing charges for physical assault. It's perhaps a little bit more flexible and perhaps also reason you might say uh sometimes people use the word um primaasy or an initial reason not to press charges unless you think there's some other uh overriding reason to perhaps you know enforce criminal justice or you know if it's a serious assault you might be protecting the community by pressing charges and such. But if you're do if you're taking that step, it's not done to save face or because you were actually harmed in the assault. You know, that's the the stoic uh stoic view. Yeah, this is the I think that makes sense. There's basically this pro-social reasons to enforce the law um and to stand up for yourself and other people that don't involve thinking your life was ruined by this event. Um the I mean this is from Stbias who's reporting on what Mason surface said. So you you want to be it's this thing when you're doing any sort of analysis where you want to be careful not to read it literally. But the line is he said that he would never file a lawsuit against anyone for assault. Nor would he advise anyone who thinks the study of philosophy is worthwhile to f to file one. Um, but I I think your point about doing that because you've been harmed is is is seeking vengeance, seeking retribution for harm is off the table. And I mean, I'm I'm comfortable with that interpretation. That makes sense to me. It's consistent. This idea of never using the legal system. Yeah, I think that's a bit far reaching. Um, and maybe he maybe he's arguing for that, but if he is, I think maybe he's gone a bit too far. >> I believe he even there's even some record suggesting he was involved in a lawsuit against another Roman. So >> maybe he maybe he had a terrible time. >> Maybe he had a really bad experience with it and was like, I I'm never doing that again. Don't don't I don't recommend anybody does that. >> Yeah, that's that's funny perhaps. So >> uh >> any of those other ones you you >> I mean he's certainly conservative about the view when it comes to marriage you know the the purpose for marriage is um to have children at the same time he does say it's essential that the husband and wife are companions and there's a specific virtue ver there are virtues associated with being a good husband or wife uh related to what's often translated as companionship uh which I think is uh is useful. Yeah. So here's a line in um marriage there must be above all companionship and care of husband and wife for each other both in sickness and in health on every occasion. Each party entering into a marriage desires this after all just as they desire children. So that's interesting because it suggests maybe uh it's not the sole purpose of a marriage is to have children. >> Yeah, this is so this is I'm using the Cynthia King translation page 57. He says he said that the chief end of marriage is uniting together and have having children. Um, husband and wife should come together for the following reasons. To live with each other, to have children, and to consider all things as common possessions, and nothing is private, not even the body itself. Um, the birth of the child, which this union will bring about, is important, but this cannot be the only motive for marriage since procreation could result from sexual relations apart from marriage, just as when animals mate. So, I think that's the point you're getting to, which is um if the only point was having kids, everybody could just be could just go have kids. Um the important point is that you you're in a kind of a bond, a companionship, and then having kids in that context. >> I think so. But but as your passage reveals per you can't perhaps read him in the more liberal way which is or you know sort of like there are different purposes to marriage companionship or uh whether or not you want to have children. So that liberal reading probably just doesn't it doesn't work. >> Yeah. But also we shouldn't have bad marriages for the point of >> you shouldn't you shouldn't be terrible to your wife but be together because you uh you know got to have kids. um that >> absolutely um I think it's also in terms of the the list it's also worth uh calling out the view about parental authority that's probably another place in which Rousonius Rufus is at least slightly subversive just because parental authority especially the authority of the father in Roman society was immense I think in earlier Roman times uh father ruled his household completely. He had uh a say over who lived and died in the household. So suggestions like Monius Rufus' were perhaps you know by the time he uh he was around those views had likely laxed a little but still uh somewhat subversive in terms of what the authority of uh your parents are especially the father. >> Yeah. Yeah. And I wonder even how, you know, it's easy, it's easy to put our own kind of contemporary view onto this. I wonder how subversive even just saying don't have, you know, he says that don't sleep with your female slaves. like in in in one sense I I associate it with um I associate that with with kind of Christianity and kind of modern political conservativism but I wonder if that would be it's subversive but it's like calling out kind of people's behavior like there's probably a lot of powerful successful popular people who are going about not being monogous in their marriage. Um so there is a critical aspect to that. It's it's it's um punching up as well as as telling you know telling it's providing a consistent standard for everybody. Um not trying to get the devian in line way to read it. >> Well I I do think there are some people who just sort of the this is maybe getting a little far field but there's these sort of historical arguments about uh Christianity playing an essential role in changing the makeup of western culture because of perhaps some kinds of Christian egalitarianism being less focused on the family as such. But I do know some people have argued you see that early a little earlier in the Romans uh especially some aristocratic Romans and the Stoics are a good candidate for that and I think this is an example of of that precisely you know even though I because Romans could do whatever they wanted with their slaves and um so Monius Rufus is saying, you know, even though you can do that, you shouldn't and you should think in some in a real sense, you know, think worse of people who do mistreat their slaves or can't control their sexual appetites. And uh but I think that that does sort of show the precursor of Christianity in terms of more egalitarianism towards slaves, women uh and of course there's a general point about you know everyone having a soul and um that you see in stoicism that is that fundamental point of uh kinship with the rest of humanity equality at least as humans go. So that takes a little far field but I do think that's an interesting thought and worth uh perhaps writing or thinking about some more. Yeah, well put. Uh, it's really interesting like that idea of the soul because I mean the stoics don't equate like I wouldn't want to say the capacity for reason is the soul for the stoics. That's a bit of an oversimplification of the way they view that. But it is the thing that makes us special, sets us apart, and we all have in common, men and women as we as we just spoke to. Um, yeah, interesting idea. Cool. Um, so those are some of his advice, some of his practical advice. He has some more in the in the later end of the book. It becomes focused on um we talked about in the last episode. He doesn't quite become an aesthetic. He's he's not virtue is not developed solely through physical practice, but he thinks there's a value to physical practice and a value to physical hardship and training and some advice related to that. So first is he says diet is very important for a good life. It really matters what we eat. Specifically recommends a raw food diet of whole food. Um take that for what it's worth but that's what mason rufus wants you to eat. Um we eat fancy foods for pleasure which is bad. There's no need for this. There's no need for this pleasure. And then the wrong kind of food can reduce our mental acuity. It's just the idea of kind of overeing or eating poorly makes us less means we're less mentally sharp, less able to reflect and do philosophy well. Um, another piece of advice is that we should dress minimalistically. He says we want to develop calluses. We want to strengthen our body without harming it. So you think of this, you know, not wearing shoes. We want to feel some heat and cold. Again, not too much. You think about this idea of as much as you can such that you don't become distracted by it. If you're if you're so cold you can't think well, um that's not good. But you want to be the kind of person that can, you know, go outside in in in the cold and not have it entirely distract you or ruin you. Same with thing with heat. We want to be we want to be able to sweat a little bit, but not too much. But but but more than the average person was aiming for at his time, otherwise he wouldn't be giving that advice. and probably a lot more than we feel today with our air conditioning and um you know our heaters. Another is to avoid luxurious living. So he says quote I myself would therefore choose to be sick rather than live in luxury. Being sick harms the body only. Living in luxury harms both soul and body by making the body weak and powerless and the soul undisiplined and cowardly. And so there's this idea of this corrupting aspect of luxury. Hard physical hardship harms the body. But uh you know too much too much luxury harms the body and the soul. Makes your body weak and your soul weak. And then the last piece of uh piece of advice he says you should grow out your hair. I just like calling out we sometimes skip over these things. I just like focusing on them. And there it's again this kind of natural argument about like why are you trimming your hair? just leave it alone cuz if it if you if it gets in the way of your movement, you know, if you're getting if you're getting stuck on things, then cut it. But but don't trim it. Just like leave it alone. And it's this I think again this focus on this kind of natural living. It's not quite this Dioynes the cynic approach to things, but you know, we probably shouldn't be stressing about our our our haircuts and um making sure we we've got, you know, just the right outfits. Um you know, we're just the right temperature. We're eating the fanciest food. This This has a a real kind of This has a real potential corrupting influence. >> Yeah. Some of the stuff about not trimming your hair is too funny. He would certainly look down on us perhaps. >> Yeah, exactly. >> Um >> um and I think stuff is good to call out, right? Because sometimes people say, "Where is the stoic practical advice?" And it's here it is. It's this entire lecture about cutting hair. Yeah. Man should cut his hair the way he prunes vines by removing only the stuff that gets in the way. >> Nice. It does seem like sometimes there are social purposes that I wonder if are being overlooked by this line of thought to uh by by Masonius Rufus. But uh he's certainly right when it comes to people can focus too much attention on this and regardless of whether they're social purposes or not to being wellgroomed. There's certainly a risk whenever you're engaged in this kind of practice. And I think wealth is probably the clearest example where you can see it. And that that line about wealth is really nice. But even if you think oh you know I ought to be wellgroomed because you know that's the culture of my society. And Mousius Rufus also tells me I need to be married and I need to look presentable to get married. So, uh maybe that reasoning is fine as far as it goes, but there's certainly uh risks involved with it as well. Yeah. Well, here I mean he says men who cut we're getting we're digging deep into the hair. Um men who cut their hair clearly do so in order to look beautiful to those whom they wish to please. They trim and arrange their hair to attract the attention of women and boys whose praise they seek. Other men cut their hair because it bothers them and they shave their beards. Clearly, such men have been broken by luxurious living and have become completely emasculated. Um, so there's a point there, right? Like the the hair stuff is funny, but the point is, you know, I think about this a lot in the way that I dress. I I'll ground in a practical example. I have I'm not a very fashionable guy. I don't have like a lot of and and a lot of the reason I struggled with fashion is I thought like man I'm not going to buy that $100 shirt just to like impress people. I'm not going to like it just seemed wrong to me to like go to the mall and stress about the outfits you're going to wear just so you can physically appear a certain way. That's not the same as like grooming and basic hygiene. But I I had a hard time kind of wrapping my my head around fashion for that reason. And I think this is part of his point. And it's like if you if you're really doing this to like because you're addicted to other people thinking you're attractive or praising the way you look, there's a problem there. And then likewise, if you're, you know, if you're physically uncomfortable with a beard, um you're just kind of being physically weak, you should be able to put up with the itching and the scratching and the uncomfortableness. Um you know, do I think this is this is the thing you should be thinking about as a philosopher? No. But it it encapsulates that kind of idea of, you know, don't don't don't take extra steps or do this extra work for your ego and your pride. And if you're taking these extra steps because you can't handle a little bit of discomfort, then you've probably become uh a bit too weak um with physical discomfort. And >> yeah, that's certainly a theme you get through Masonius Rufus. And uh you you see positive examples of Spartans littered throughout the lectures especially their ability to withstand physical pain of course but Masonius Rufus and that bit about not assault that's you know that's being able to withstand uh not not suing people in response to physical or verbal assaults that's uh being able to withstand social pain not uh grave after pleasures and uh you focus ultimately on philosophy which he sees as practice. So he's certainly consistent throughout. >> Great. Anything anything else on Masonius? >> I think that's it. I think it's always good to re revisit uh Rufus. Perhaps something we could do in a another year or so. We do have a course on Masonius Rufus in the STOA app where we go through these different lectures and uh connect exercises for each one. So do check that out if you haven't already. But uh yeah, I think this is a good good practice and thanks for putting this together. Yeah, thanks Phil.
