---
title: "The Laughing Cynic Who Taught Stoicism's Founder (Episode 185)"
slug: the-laughing-cynic-who-taught-stoicism-s-founder
episode_number: 185
youtube_id: wH2sksZDXKo
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wH2sksZDXKo
upload_date: 2025-05-27
duration: 39:24
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Caleb Ponttoveros and I'm Michael Trombble. Today we're going to be talking about the cynic philosopher Krades. But before we jump into that, we've got a quick announcement. Yeah. Um, so I just wanted to raise that I'm participating in a in an event. So just putting that on the radar for anyone listening if they want to come. So this is something for Evolve World magazine. It's called Cultivating Wisdom and Virtue. How can the practice of stoicism enrich our lives? That is um it's it's Friday, May 30th, 6:00 to 9:00 p.m. C, which is a time zone in Germany. So it's 12 to 3 Eastern time. I I'm leading it. So if you want to hear what I have to say, you don't get enough on the podcast and want to come hear some more discussion about uh stoicism, stoicism as a way of life. Um, and then there's also something fun about this quick after that talk, quick break, and then actually breakout groups and dialogue and discussion with other people that are attending and then kind of everybody comes back together and talks about um what they were talking about and and the um yeah, really an opportunity to meet with other people interested in these kind of topics, discuss and connect with them. Um, so there'll be a link to that in this episode and would be lovely to see some people there. Yeah. So check that out at evolve-world.com since there's a list of programs. Should be able to find Michaels. And we do get asked for, we have been asked, I should say, for more European friendly events when you run events in the past. So for all of you Europeans out there, now now's your time. Yeah. Now's your chance. Cancel your Friday plans. All right. So today we're going to be talking aboutrdes a cynic philosopher and he fits into the timeline of stoicism. I mean he's an interesting figure in itself but he fits into the timeline of stoicism because he was one of the teachers of Zeno and we've sort of discussed this through line from cynicism to stoicism before we had a discussion on antisines the first cynic. That was episode 171. And he was the teacher of Dioynes. That's the famous Dioynes of Cinnope. You know, the synic who lived in a barrel. Uh, and Dioynes was the teacher of Krat. Um, we covered Dioynes in um that was episode 144. So then we have we have this sort of throughine of cynicism to stoicism. And uh it's interesting to think about you know how was stoicism influenced by the cynics um and also explore you know the lives of the cynics themselves and see you know what's admirable what's interesting amusing about them. Yeah I mean I think it's a great I think it's a great topic. This is the teacher of Zeno founder of stoicism. So, and we'll get into the biography in a bit, but you know, Zeno is this this non-filosophical character uh who's not living particularly philosophical comes across kind of has his world rocked or his perspective shifted and from that combination of of cynicism and Zeno's own perspective, Stoic Stoic philosophy is born. And so, uh great to go back know if it's the source. I think Zeno is probably the source, but certainly the the inspiration for a lot of the stoic ideas here. Yeah, I think it's useful to think about Zeno is piecing together a lot of the different philosophical influences around at the time and uh certainly cynicism was one of the strongest. The classic story is that Zeno was shipwrecked. Um he goes to Athens, ends up in a book seller's shop and is reading the second book of Zenapon's memorabilia, which is a platonic dialogue essentially. And then he asked, you know, where can I find men like Socrates today? Andrdes passes by at that very moment. And the book seller says, follow him. And that's what Zeno does. And that's sort of begins his philosophical quest, if you will. We'll get into tor's background in a bit. Just you you've got Zeno, he's inspired by Socrates, but at this point, it's already hundred years later. Uh, you know, Socrates isn't around anymore. So, he's like, "Who are the followers of Socrates? Who can I learn from?" And it's like, "That guyes, that's your that's your guy." And so, you know, it's like, "Great. I'm going to go I'm going to go learn." And I think that I mean I what's really cool about that story I guess too is that explicit connection to Socrates as well because he he he discovers cynicism as a way to follow Socrates. Yeah, we've talked about this before but perhaps I mean in some ways stoicism is best understood as a Socratic philosophy but there are all these different framings on what Socrates meant and s the cynics took some aspects of Socrates while other schools recitalians and such took others plainist of course. So um getting a grasp with the cynic interpretation of Socrates can be a useful way to you know see stoism perhaps. Cool. Cool. So, just some basic facts about Kratos. He was uh born 365 BC, died 285 BC and apparently he came from a distinguished family but upon witnessing a certain tragedy according to Dioynes Leurch he uh turns to cynic philosophy and that's perhaps through the influence of Antistines or or Dioynes. Um, and as a result, he decides to turn his property into money. You know, distinguished families, they mostly have their wealth and land and such. So, he converts that into money. He gets liquid and then distributes that money to others. And of course, that's that turn to cynic minimalism. he is is essentially giving up his wealth and decides to pursue the philosophy of stoicism. So right there there's an interesting parallel and Zeno you know he discovers philosophy when he's been shipwrecked whereas Grady's out of vol some voluntary choice decides to take up the cynic mantle take up the cloak of a philosopher um and in part of that uh live a life of if not poverty live a life of uh much less means than he was capable of. Yeah, I don't know if this is a criticism of stoicism, but I think there's something symbolic here of of, you know, the stoic, if you were going to criticize stoicism as a cynic, you'd say the cynic is the person who, you know, proactively, gladfully gives up the indifference, and the the stoic is the person who kind of turns to stoicism when they've lost all their stuff in a shipwreck, but they're very happy with the way their life was going before the shipwreck. I think there's something interesting there that um yeah obviously didn't have to do this but he's like it's that same I mean well it is just that cynic idea about these things have a corrupting capability right it's why Dioynes lives in a barrel there's actually something harmful about participating in the life of politics or possessions or wealth where the stoics don't feel that way it's like easy come easy go preferable to have them but you can still be happy if you get in a shipwreck and lose all your things is like No, I'm actually going to sell my land where the stoic would be like, I'm going to keep my land. I'm going to go study philosophy, but why would I give up my land? It's nice to have land. Um, so yeah, I think key difference there. Yeah, absolutely. I think you have the example of Zeno who turns to philosophy when he's forced to, you know, finds philosophy perhaps a source of resilience for that moment. And then of course on the other side, you have the story of Senica. And Senica is someone who says, you know, live as if you had sold your property. Don't be attached to it. But of course, you don't need to in fact do that. And Senica's like, once every couple weeks, you know, have plain breakfast, sleep on the floor, and then go back to your mansion. Um, I don't necess like Yeah. I I don't I think I think Senica's got the right idea, but when you put on the cynic lens, you you kind of laugh at it. Yeah. Yeah. I also think the cenican perspective is correct but there is a way in which certainly there's a there's a kind of criticism from the from the cynic that that has its bite. Um and you can see a kind of egalitarianism to from he distributes the sum to his fellow citizens. But I saw there's another version of the story where it's also related that Dioynes persuaded to give up his fields. so give up his land and just throw all his money into the sea. Uh there's a Dioyny's perspective is that you know if you really think that money is corrupting then why are you giving it to others? There's a there's also that that that thought. Cool. Well we'll we'll just talk through some different stories of from life. This of course comes from Dioynes Learchis's um lives of the philosophers. Very short chapter. You can check it out. It's one of the key sources for the biographical and doctrinal details of many ancient philosophers, especially some of these lesserk known figures. And we'll talk through some of these stories, try to get a sense as much as we can of uh what kind of person was, how he lived his philosophy, and then as we go through that discussing connections uh and differences to stoicism. Yeah, looking forward to it. Let's do it. Cool. So, just I just picked out a few stories that I thought were interesting and uh one was there's always this question, you know, what's the point of studying philosopher? What's this point of studying philosophy? Andrdes used to say that we should study philosophy to the point of seeing in generals nothing but donkey drivers which is a a a a great line and I think a good way to capture this cynic rejection of status and uh it's also of course embodied in the story about Dioynes of Synope in his story when Alexander comes to see Dioynes and Dioynes treats him with no difference whatsoever. Simply tells him to, you know, get out the way, stop blocking his son. And yeah, I like I like something I like about that, too, is that it's not an insult for the cynic. Like, it's only an insult because of the general's ego. Like a cynic isn't a cynic isn't mocking donkey drivers. Like, yeah, go ahead and, you know, command your donkey. That's fine. Uh, that's your business. It's only an insult to the ego of of the general themselves. Yeah, absolutely. Take it sort of takes the air out of any pretense a general might have had. And of course a general has significant amount of status in the Greek citystates where you know the aristocratic classes are essentially warrior landowners. Um I think I think that's also just a generally cynicism has a kind of rejection of status which is grounded in their larger rejection of convention as a whole and that's something that sets it apart from stoicism perhaps and I think there's a sense which stoic could agree that you should see generals and donkey drivers is ultimately the same. But of course, as the Stoics want to say, we all have our roles. And in that sense, of course, a general and donkey driver is not the same. They have different roles to play. Of course, they're all part of the they're all are kin. They all possess they both possess reason, but uh nonetheless, they have different roles to play. and that might mean different forms of recognition or or what have you. So, uh there's an a potential interesting tension there or this might be a a potential disagreement with uh this the cynics. What do you think about that in terms of so the the the view is that the stoics we've all got our roles and you know there should be you think do you think the stoics think there should be a some roles that are better or more important than others like the general should be respected because of that because of what that position demands. Um, maybe a better way to put it is that the stoic doesn't automatically throw out convention in the way a cynic does. And uh, yeah, so they can see convention as it's not perfect, but it often can be a guide for action. So I think that's that's sort of a general disagreement. And then there's a particular case of, you know, how do you treat people in different roles? And I think the Stoics probably would be closer to the cynic side than maybe say an ordinary Athenian. They wouldn't want to give a you know they wouldn't want to worship generals and such but they still have this in the background convention can be a guide for action and in some ways it's part of what goes into thinking about how to manage indifference. Well, yeah. I mean, another way of asking this question, I guess, is if stoicism is a bit politically conservative, right? And that um there was some sort of rule for this. I can't remember what it was, but it some there was some law way of saying fence. Yeah, there it is. Yeah. Um what was it? Oh, Chesterton's fence. Chesterton's fence. That's the exact thing. Maybe it was you that that said that for the first time to me, but that kind of idea that the stoics are like, look, if this is around for a while, it's probably has some sort of function. We should at least default to considering what that function is. Yeah, I think that's I think that's probably the stoic position. The stoic is then going to be like really radical of like, I've examined the fence. The fence is pointless. I will now no longer defend the fence. Like the stoic is not going to support convention for the sake of convention in my opinion. and they're go, "Oh, but people are going to be upset with you if you don't support the fence or people are going to think you're weird." The Stoics are not going to agree with that. But I do I do think they're going to default to Yeah. at least supposing the these conventions basically these conventions have value. So, we want to check which ones are good and which ones are bad where the cynics are Yeah. more skeptical holistically. Yeah, I think that's right. The stoic doesn't start from a place of skepticism, but that's also of course consistent with going against the crowd. Of course, going against convention when they've Yeah. When they've thought through the issues and u made a judgment. I've been reading some Epic Tetus and he's really ripping into the people for caring about their fancy hairstyles or their you know um the way that they you know the way that they dress or there there's all these kinds of things that are um you know that's a social convention that carries with it these kind of social norms but Epictitus has made a call of just like you're you're focusing on playing that game instead of becoming a good person and that's just not a good thing. Um yeah, so happy to criticize it once he's evaluated it. For sure. Absolutely. So some other lines from um here's a nice line on flatterers. Those who live with flatterers he declared to be as defenseless as calves in the midst of wolves. For neither these nor those have any to protect them, but only such as plot against them. Probably there's a decent amount of agreement with stoicism there. you know, be careful with uh simply seeking positive feedback, cultivating uh psychopantic behavior. Yeah. Okay. Agreed. Flattery is flattery is dangerous. Um I guess this is like critical of like successful people again, right? Because it's like who lives with flatterers? Well, the general. Well, um the um Alexander the Great, like these kind of great people are the people that are surrounded by flatterers. So maybe that's where the bit of the punch is is like um you're actually you think you're this big strong person, but you're actually just kind of like a calf like um uh unprotected and weak, which is I think I think a good point. Yeah. Yeah. It does seem like one of these messages, you know, be careful about flatterers that is near universal but is difficult to uh because they because it feels so good to be flattered because I like to hear nice things about myself. Krdes also he used to say it's impossible to find anybody wholly free from flaws but just as in a pomegranate one of the seeds is always going to be bad. I think that just the the meaning of that is just that uh perfection is impossible. So you don't have that quest of sagehood which is interesting. I don't know if that comes out into a comprehensive view for uh grades or if it's just just a little bit of a heristic rule of thumb, but perhaps that's another difference with at least some forms of stoicism where you're not thinking about uh you know aiming for perfection, aiming to be the sage. I see, man. I see that connected. Yeah, you could read that in a strong way and say there's no sage and maybe the I think they the cynics probably believe that. I don't think Dioynes would be like I'm without flaw. Doesn't seem very Dioynesy or neither would Socrates. But I see it also connected to that flattery line, right? You have these people like I'm so great. I'm perfect. I'm amazing. And it just starts with this like uh nobody's perfect. So, like you've got problems and if nobody's bringing up your problems, you're probably surrounded by a bunch of people who are like, you know, not telling you how it is. Um, that that's I mean that's the connection I see. Yeah. Yeah, that's well put. That's well put. Uh, we have a a case on insults. Having exasperated the musician Nicodos, he was struck by him on the face. So, he stuck a plaster on his forehead with these words on it. Nicodro's handiwork. That's funny. Have you ever seen the Dave Chappelle skit? I don't know if this is dated at this point or what he gets he gets punched in the face. This is like Oh, do you know the one I'm talking about? The guy gets punched in the face, but he has like a bunch of rings on. It leaves like an imprint in his forehead. No. Is that the one where being real goes wrong or is it that one? Like I might have to look it up. I might have to look it up. We'll we'll we'll we'll edit it in after. Uh but that's what that reminds me of. It's like the humor is the same. I mean, that's funny, right? Like it's like you it's the same kind of that's a sense of humor. I actually really like that where it's like, you know, not taking not taking yourself too seriously either. Not being very prideful and walking around with a big note on your forehead. That's funny. Yeah. Yeah. Along the same lines, he would carry on a regular campaign of invective against the Cortisians, habituating himself to meet their abuse. So, these are just uh uh escorts. And I think that's a that's a funny scene imagining tossing insults towards these escorts, these carticians, and then receiving it back as well. He's like he he wants to train himself in being insulted. So he goes in and finds these like really kind of tough robust people and just criticizes them and insults them and they just throw it back and he's just like this is my this is my mental training. Yeah, this is my mental training. Seems like a bit of a rationalization. I think there are just some people who you know enjoy that kind of conflict, enjoy these sorts of witisms, I suppose. Yeah. Um perhaps not so much connected to but he married uh Hipparkia uh who was a also a Athenian from or we're not entirely sure if she's Athenian I suppose but she was another Greek from a noble family. So of course her family would disapprove of a marriage to Cradies. She took up the life of a poor philosopher and she was also a sinning philosopher. Probably deserves another episode in her own right. But uh he married her would keep her in would interact with her in public. Uh and there's outrageous stories about them fornicating in public which may or may not be true. But the the main fact uh that he would interact with a high class woman in public would have actually been against Athenian society in of itself just because higher class women were secluded in Athenian society at that time. uh and I think generally throughout the history of Athens uh please there any classists in the audience please correct me if that's mistaken but uh Athenian society was actually one of the more uh restrictive of the uh Greek societies for higher class women. So I think that's there you see also another this other rejection of convention but I think that's just fits in cynic the general theme of uh cynicism and perhaps some of these more egalitarian themes as well you know not seeing there being a large difference between the donkey driver and the general there being a large difference between a man and a woman. Yeah. So there's something like there's something there's a certain leeway these crazy old philosophers get in Athens by this point. You've already had Dioynes. You had Socrates before him. But then you have um you have a woman Hipparkia doing this um which is just was just another level of kind of rejection of norms above and beyond seeing a man. It's just like it's one thing to see doing this, but now his his wife is out there um and his like wife from a famous family um doing the same kind of stuff. I mean, that's pretty cool. Yeah. Yeah. I think um yeah, there's this whole tradition about writing sort of these outrageous stories about the cynics. So, uh, I wouldn't put too much stock in the in some of these, but I do think the general theme, you know, there's a source for these stories and, uh, there's a reason why the cynics, you know, became the subject of these stories and that is because of their, I think, their outsider status, their almost perhaps comic type status in Athenian society. um both rejecting norms and then of course pointing just making fun of people taking the you know I think it's a great example perhaps of the use of the use of humor in philosophy use of skits even to to show uh philosophical truths if you want yeah I mean it's it's great it's it's Um, I think it's cool. Yeah, it's a common through line between the cynics. You have, of course, you have these stories about Dioynes living in a barrel, masturbating in public, sticking his nose up at Alexander Antisan. You know, he's the first one. He's the moderate one, but he himself is, of course, as we covered, also has all these outrageous behaviors. Also embraces the Yeah. minimalist lifestyle. Add to that list Krat throwing his money in the ocean, selling all his land and throwing his money in the ocean or just like having sex in public with his wife. Uh which are just like I mean just the most radical things people could think of. Um so yeah, this is what this is what they're constantly being accused of. We are you saying here, Kale, to take it kind of with a grain of salt or um is the view here that the cynics did this stuff and they did it as kind of performance art or that's just how they were or you know they were being lied about after. Oh, maybe there's just some amount of embellishment. I don't know if um maybe I don't think they're being lied about, but maybe there's some amount of embellishment about some of their deeds. Well, maybe another way to put it is if uh maybe there's some amount of embellishment. The general theme uh that comes through I think must have been grounded reality in some way. You know, there's a reason people chose a cynics for these kinds of stories. Even if you uh even if you are skeptical about, you know, did they did they actually do these things? I think in some sense they must have rejected material goods. I mean certainly that's true. They must have projected some amount of sexual norms, some amount of uh you know norms between how men and women interact. I mean that that that must be true. Yeah. Just some of them maybe get twisted a little bit. But I guess the point here is we don't really have that from the stoics or from the cynics. People aren't like political enemies of Dioynes making things up. there, but maybe adding a little bit more uh adding a little bit more juice to the story to make it a little bit shock a little bit more shocking, a little bit a little bit funnier. One of the line from this actually comes from Plutarch. Um he described he said that Krades with only his wallet and tattered cloak laughed out his life jokusely that's with joy uh as if he had always been at a festival which is I I think a good nice way to see someone as a you know he's a cynic he's doing some of these outrageous things having fun while doing it having fun while teaching philosophy while getting you know plastered by uh Nicodromos and so on. So I I think that's a and I think that's a general sense you get from the cynics. You know do bit of a rascal but having fun nonetheless. And perhaps that's uh that's that's that's something to emulate perhaps. Yeah. I mean I like that that's kind of the stoic side of the fork. I was looking up the contemporary definition for cynic because I just think this ancient one so often and it's um at least according to Google right now. It's a person who believes that people are motivated purely by self-interest rather than acting honorably or for honorable or unselfish reasons. And so that contemporary sense is just everybody's kind of a jerk. They're kind of uh in it for themselves. They're hypocritical. If they pretend they're not in it for themselves, they act like they're altruistic. They're lying. That's kind of a sad way to be. Obviously, obviously any sort of contemporary definition loses some of the nuance, but think about how different that is than the person who is, you know, laughing, having fun, sounds like they're always at a festival, but they've just got a cloak. You know, they just got they just got some tattered rags, but they're still having a good time. That is kind of a fun um that's a fun way to think about stoicism or cynicism, excuse me. It loses some of the cutting aspect of it. Like I do think the cynics deserve their reputation. Maybe not people are acting in self-interest, but they're acting out of convention. They're not acting authentically. Um but that idea of joy is not something we think of in cynicism today. Yeah, absolutely. So I think in the cynics you see a kind of version of hardcore stoicism. Perhaps we've talked about this before, but you see that this emphasis on loving the philosophical life, rejecting anything that is irrelevant to that project, especially material goods, a kind of prescriptive minimalism, this idea that you should reject wealth, uh that you don't see in the Stoics, um except for perhaps Masonius Rufus has a little bit of that. And uh because there's this skepticism about so [Music] many about the status quo um there's a lot more possibility for actions and just interacting with people as people. So of course the cynics rejected norms between men and women and also between uh other citystates. you know, they were cosmopolitan, citizen of the uh cosmos, not didn't, you know, see themselves necessarily as Athenians, uh, but were playing more of an outsider role. Um, and these are ideas that certainly influence stoisism that of course influence stoism quite strongly. So, and that's maybe why it's useful to frame as a a hardcore version of Stoism with of course some different theoretical differences, but uh you know there's there's a reason why Epictitus saw the cynics as admirable nonetheless. I mean I really love that idea that you raised about talking to people as people. I think that's one thing I I think we talked about this before. Cynicism is a bit too hardcore for me. I don't think it's something I I aspire to holistically the same way I might aspire to the stoic sage holistically. But that idea that the kind of person that can meet uh Alexander the Great as a citizen of the cosmos and as an equal, the kind of person that can laugh with just your cloak. Um those there there's some there's some cool stuff that I take from it. Um, and so the same as Epictitus, I see that it's admirable, but I Epictitus really put it on a pedestal, right? Like some of the Stoics really thought it was for the special few, as Epictitus would put it. Um, I don't I don't think I necessarily agree with that. I'm not sure if it's a better life than stoicism. I don't think it is, but parts of it really do appeal to me. Um especially as you said that that egalitarian part that's something in stoicism that appeals to me. Um but just treating people as people you know generals the same as donkey drivers. Absolutely. Cool. Do you have any other words as uh by way of conclusion or do you want to touch on any other stories or lines I didn't pick out? I mean the the other thought I have about cynicism more generally is maybe the benefit of the rejection of convention is this kind of position of this skeptical starting position. The skeptical starting position of like what is value what matters in life. I think one of the difficulties about stoicism, putting stoicism into practice, is that you're expected to both act pretty similarly in terms of indifference as everybody else does, but then have a very different internal life. Like you're supposed to pursue your career, possessions, a good reputation in the community, a good job. and different people, you know, maybe you're pursuing a different life and you shouldn't, but many stoics will continue to live these kind of normal looking lives and that's consistent with stoicism, but then we're supposed to have this like internal transformation without this external transformation. I think in some ways there's this there's this appeal. Epictitus talks about, you know, throw throw out these ideas of good and bad, start from zero because if you try to hold on to them, it's going to be too confusing. And I think there's that kind of ideal in cynicism where they okay they reject everything. And then I like the stoic proposition and maybe this is what Zeno did. It's like okay we start by rejecting everything and then we build back in from first principles. Okay well virtue is good. Okay possessions are preferred indifference and we kind of build that life back up. But I think in practice it can be hard as a stoic to uh you know be like well my life's going to look pretty similar but now I'm just not supposed to care about this because it's uh it's indifferent or it's not up to me or um something like that. Whereas at least the cynic is like ah no like I spit on social convention or you know I'm going to pee in the street because what people think of me doesn't matter. Um, now I wonder I wonder if if you thought if you thought about like a stoic training program in a vacuum like maybe a Plato's Republic if you would have people be cynical for a period of time and then kind of reintroduce them. I don't know. Uh, I don't know if that if that would work, but I it it seems almost hard for me to become a stoic while integrated into society, but stoicism asks you to do that. Yeah, I think that's a that's a great point. You know, as a as a stoic, you're supposed to live the life of a citizen, live in the city without, in a sense, being of the city, you know, keeping your internal life separate and really living a radical philosophy without perhaps that being uh the radical life that someone who's extreme as a cynic would lead. And there's that risk that just by uh living uh normally externally that begins to impact and influence the internal world as well, right? So, and uh you know, I think that perhaps that that's what you're pointing at is there's that there's that risk of I guess the Stokes would really just say contamination almost, but probably also there's a there's this other problem of uh you know, how do you know what the right thing to do is? How do you know which conventions should be followed, which should be rejected, of course, which is which is a large question. Um but uh in response to that first problem, I suppose I think what what you're saying makes sense and it might be uh you're suggesting that you should live as a cynic for a bit. That's why uh Senica suggests um you know going without for a week or essentially living as a cynic in order to not you can test yourself but also see you know how should you live. Um yeah know I mean I just agree. I agree. I I think I mean this comes back to Masonius Rufus. I mean, basically what we're talking about is is there educational benefit for living pretty radically at certain points in time. I think Masonius Rufus and Epictitus would say yes. I think it's a spectrum. Senica might dial it down to just a week, but the Stoics seem to agree there is a benefit to doing that. And I I just think it it might be a bit easier. We see this in kids nowadays too, right? Like people be people are more radical when they're younger often and then some some mellow out. Many mellow out. Not everybody but many kind of I would say maybe become a little bit more less extreme in their views. So I wonder if there's this almost this benefit. Certainly, I think the stoic would look at somebody who was cynical at 17 and say, "Oh, you're a lot you're going to be a lot more likely to become a good stoic than somebody who was uh maybe epicurion at at 17." And they'd say, you know, you you don't quite have it right. You gone a bit too far, but this is a much better material to work with. Yeah. Well, I think I like the idea of um seeing where you can be cynical and perhaps using that as a tool of development or part of a a practice um as a way to be more stoic. I think that's that's certainly a fruitful fruitful thing to do and and that's you know that's why uh Monius Rufus Epictitus and Senica proposed proposed that kind of thing. Yeah, it makes sense to me. Awesome. Well, uh, there's one interesting line that it might be worth leaving with from Krat. Um, something worth thinking about. Says that what he has gained from philosophy is a court of loopins and to care for no one. All right. Thanks, Michael. Thanks, Gil. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use, and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at Stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
