---
title: "The Unfettered Mind | Stoic Zen (Episode 196)"
slug: the-unfettered-mind-stoic-zen
episode_number: 196
youtube_id: z6Yc1kYnQZI
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z6Yc1kYnQZI
upload_date: 2025-08-12
duration: 56:07
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Caleb Anteveros and I'm Michael Trombble. And today we're going to be talking about the book The Unfettered Mind. It's a book on Zen Buddhism. We'll share some more of the background of course during the conversation. It's uh I enjoyed reading it. I just stumbled across it for uh my own personal reading. I thought it would be good to talk about in stoic conversations because it has a distinct but also I think importantly useful framework for thinking about the mind and I found it was a clear relatively clear and lucid explanation of Zen Buddhism at least as far as such things go. So we'll definitely talk about that some more. >> Yeah, I really enjoyed it. I mean I I'd never read this before. We were just doing the first chapter but it was a quick easy read. kind of reminded me of reading Epictitus's handbook where you go, "Wow, I I'm enjoying this, but I'm also aware that I'm not picking up on all the nuance that may be underneath here." And I always love to talk about Buddhism. I was thinking about before we started talking, Caleb, that when I first started studying philosophy, I remember the first time I studied stoicism or was presented to me in the classroom, I was like, "This is pretty stupid." I totally disagreed with it. Maybe that was I don't know if that's the point I was at in my life or if it was the way the professor was presenting it. But the first time I I discovered Buddhism I thought wow this is really really cool and I think it's maybe a you know both are these philosophies of life both are focused on I would say practical application maybe it is just the a you know an accident of of of history or my surroundings that I ended up focusing more in stoicism. Maybe if I went to a school that studied that focused more on Buddhism, I would have become a a Buddhist instead. But it's always appealed to me in the same kind of intuitive way that stoicism has. So always happy to chat about it. And this is coming from Yeah. a historical expert, which is cool. >> Yeah, absolutely. So of course needs to flag that neither of us have the same expertise in Buddhism as we do uh stoicism. So this will be more of an amateur type discussion at least when we're talking about the work itself but I did did want to give some background on it as you say it's an older work it uh comes the author is taquan Soho apologies about the pronunciation but he was a Zen monk calligrapher painter poet gardener tea master and the uh writer of the preface to my translation also says perhaps also the inventor of the pickle that today retains his name. >> I don't know enough about pickles. Which pickle is that? >> The taquan Soho pickle. >> Okay. >> Uh >> it's not the dill. >> Yeah. If you're curious, you can Google that pickle. Uh looks like it's a kind of daikon radish perhaps. A pickled. It's a pickled dicon radish. uh if you're curious, but he wrote a lot and his works were a source of guidance for many. He lived from to 1645. And this particular work, the unfettered mind, is a collection of three essays or letters. And we're going to be talking about the first called the mysterious record of immovable wisdom. And that's actually written to a swordmaster. So, one reason why I found this reading so congenial is that it's immediately connected to a skill in thinking about >> Buddhism from the context of combat, martial combat particular, >> particularly sword fighting. Um, so I thought that was it's that's one way I thought it was a really useful in uh as it were. >> Yeah, it's it's it's written to a non-expert. it's written to a beginner or somebody who who who isn't doesn't know as much about Zen Buddhism, but somebody who the author still clearly respects, you know, not a new student or something. And then that person is a master of a skill or craft, in this case, swordsmanship. And so, yeah, that's that's a that's a a great perspective by which to dive into it. >> Cool. So, I think there are three main themes that I want to touch on. We'll talk about some of these themes from the letter from the essay and then move to connections to stoicism open of that discussion as well. But the three themes I wanted to pick out were the affliction of stopping, the account of training in particular, training for no mind, which is sort of the goal, and then I suppose the last aspect would be upshots for life or perhaps concrete ways one can think about no mind stopping uh showing up in a life. So uh sound good to you? >> No, no, let's jump into it. >> Cool. So it was sorry just after I said no immediately jump in. I I was getting into Tauan Soho's biography here after you mentioned the pickle and he's a character in Vagabond um which is a very famous manga series actually. It's like a historical fiction manga series based on Mousashi the author of the book of five rings. So this he's he's a actually quite prominent character in that manga as well which is cool. Yeah, that's cool. I believe him he and Mousashi were contemporaries. Um, and that would probably be another good book for us to touch on. I know we've actually had email requests >> to discuss The Book of Five Rings. Have you read that? >> Uh, I a long time ago. It's very big in the um it's popular in the martial arts circle. So, I would have read it like >> makes sense. >> I would have at least looked at it pre pre-S stoicism. So, it would be interesting to return to. >> Cool. Well, we should do that. But uh for now we'll hop into uh hop into this work and first this discussion of stopping. So I thought this was a really useful idea in a way that I hadn't heard of. Stopping is sort of the affliction of the mind that Zen Buddhists are trying to address. So I thought this was a really useful metaphor. Um but before I get into some quotes from Taan Soho, uh one of the and so he has this theme, the mind should not be train should be trained not to stop. And one way to think about this is I don't know if you've ever played the those arcade basketball games where you're given a a basketball have a s very simple setup and you're just supposed to get it through the hoop as many times as you can. just get in as many shots uh through the hoop in one minute, two minutes or something like this. Uh but they're the kind of game where if you you know get a bunch of friends together and it's a solid competition, you almost have to let your body go on autopilot because it's so fast. You know, you're trying to score as many uh baskets as you can and you don't want to reflect too much on what you're doing because that can break your rhythm. And if you break the rhythm, then maybe you'll lose one shot. And if it's a competition, that sort of thing uh really matters. I think it's a good example of a kind of activity where stopping the mind the mind stopping or interfering with itself uh shows up really uh in an intuitive and intuitive way. >> Yeah. So this is kind of like a we'll get into some of the quotes, but he's kind of speaking about a flow state, right? So he's trying to train yourself to achieve and maintain a flow state. >> Well, talk more about whether it's identical to flow, but it's it's similar. It's certainly similar to flow. So >> what so what what does stopping look like? I think there's different ways the mind can stop. And one is in time. So he writes to speak of in terms of your own martial art. Here he's writing to the swordmaster. When you first notice the sword that is moving to strike you, if you think of meeting that sword just as it is, your mind will stop at the sword in just that position. Your own movements will be undone and you will be cut down by your opponent. This is what stopping means. So that idea that you have a thought to perhaps do this technique in a combat situation, but in virtue of having that thought, you are slowing down your action. So perhaps forcing something on reality that's not exactly there. What do you think about that? >> Yeah, I mean the the writing the writing is a bit vague, which it, you know, almost always is in these texts. I mean, there's two ways to read it. One is that if you think you're going to respond a bit slower, and that's harmful, and in in a game like sword fighting, uh, a little bit a little mistake involves death. It doesn't involve, you know, someone getting past you on a breakaway or something like this. So, there's that speed aspect. The other way to read this, he says, you know, if you think of meeting that sword just as it is, your mind will stop at the sword in just that position. I also think of maybe this inability to actually flow in response to the movement of your uh opponent. So maybe they they strike down the middle. I don't I'm not a sword fighter. And you counter in the middle, but in in the process of thinking, well, I'm they're coming down the middle. I'm going to counter in that lane. They adjust their movement, but you're kind of like one step behind because you're not responding um well, you're not responding in the moment. You're kind of responding in catch-up. Either way, it's a speed aspect. I agree. It's a it's a time aspect. This made me think of um yeah, one thing we talked about, my coach would talk about in Brazilian jiu-jitsu is this idea of unconscious competence. And so, I don't know who came up with this framework, but there's this this model of you've got um unconscious incompetence. You're bad at something. You don't even realize it. Then when you learn a little bit of that skill, you do a couple sword fighting lessons. Conscious incompetence, you're aware of the fact that you're bad. Then there's conscious competence where it's like, I'm aware of what I should be doing and I'm executing it. And then the last stage is unconscious competence where you're just in that flow state. You're just kind of executing. And I see a lot of what he's saying through that kind of frame of we we want to stay at conscious competence. Uh because you want to move correctly, but you but you want to move correctly without thinking about it too much, without stopping. And I guess in a game as important or like when time is as important as it is in sword fighting, you know, being conscious of your competence is just is too slow. Yeah, that's what that's what this makes me think of as well. >> Yeah, I think that's right. That's a useful way to think about the goal is unconscious competence. And I think you're also right to point out that it's not just that thinking makes you slower at the moment, but it's in particular it makes you less perhaps you're less able to adapt to what comes next. You, you know, perhaps meeting the sword at that point would be ideal if it was a chess match or something like this sort. Yeah, exactly. you know, they make this move, you make that move, uh, and then you make this move and so on. But that's just not uh how so much reality is. You know, it's in flux. There's not a simple turn taking rhythm to it. I think there's a there's this other idea in combat uh sports where you have this idea of offensive or defensive cycles, right? this sort of idea that you can you're trying to set a rhythm as it were and your opponent's also trying to set a rhythm and in general you want to uh not be stuck in a defensive cycle, right? Where you're just defending defending and perhaps the idea, one idea you might think of here is if you're too analytical, maybe you might push yourself towards a maybe a defensive cycle or offensive cycle in a way that would be inappropriate. Yeah, I agree with that. I also think there's this aspect of I mean I think the chess metaphor is a really good one where Yes, this this shows the wisdom of um this guy. We're going to spend five minutes talking about these three sentences. The the chess metaphor it's like you're pretending something is static that it is that that isn't. So you're saying this is the way things are and given that the way things are this way I'll like given that there it's situation A. I'll respond to situation B. But you've you've lost some of the nuance of reality by just calling it situation A by just putting in a box. It's not just a defined chest chess board with uh subset of of pieces. It's like as you said it's reality that's in flux. So whether that's that's like ethics or you know sword fighting. It's not just as simple as him just doing this strike with his sword. He could be setting something else up. He could be moving. He could have options. He could be faking you. And by stopping on, oh, this is what's happening and this is situation A, so it deserves situation B. Great for a beginner, maybe great for an intermediate, but uh not the way the really the experts function in flow, I don't think. >> Yeah. The way this letter opens is with the definition of ignorance. The term ignorance means the absence of enlightenment, which is to say delusion. And stopping just is an example of ignorance, which is interesting because we don't usually think of something like how we use our attention as immediately related to, you know, what we know or don't know. It's just shining a spotlight perhaps. and you know by paying attention to something it doesn't necessarily mean I'm ignorant or knowledgeable or so on but uh at least this is an argument it's very closely connected to how you use your attention or not is tightly linked to whether or not you're ignorant. Yeah, this was the thing that I wrestled the most with and I recognize we want to balance for those listening. Maybe we'll get into some more quotes because you know I've read the whole chapter. But the I think the theme that I was struggling the most with is in stoicism we view progress through careful attention. Right? People exist in a state there. There there's almost this like yeah there's this kind of and that's that's the unconscious competence to unconscious incompetence to unconscious competence journey is that there's something similar between the beginner and the expert and that they're both functioning unconsciously. Um, martial arts has this metaphor of you gain a black belt and then it turns back into a white belt because there's this this recognition of the similarity between the white belt and the black belt, the expert and the beginner. And in stoicism, you you we say the non- stoic is moving around unconsciously. They're not reflecting. They're not aware of the impressions they're asenting to. And then they need to deliberate carefully. Be careful with their attention. make sure they're they're not believing things that are false, not getting angry about things that aren't true, not allowing their emotions to, you know, dictate future judgments non-reflectively. But here he's almost he's criticizing attention or focus or stopping. Basically, that's it. Like the the stoicism says you got to stop. Everybody got to stop. You got to pay attention. And he's criticizing stopping. And that's what I'm trying to make sense of is I think maybe he's talking about the only way I can make sense of it is he's talking about the way of the expert and then the stoicism feels the same argues the same thing. It says well the sage is also kind of in a flow state. They would argue about this about how the sage couldn't even trip because they would never make a mistake in judgment or something. And so maybe stoicism also argues this but he stoicism is so committed to stopping as an intermediate. It's such an important part of progress, I guess. Yeah. I don't know if you want to go into more into his writing, but that for me is the is that main tension. Yeah, I think I think that's good to bring up just because it is a that is I do think that's one of the key differences between this approach and stoicism is on my reading. T one isn't just talking about the uh he's not just giving you know instructions for the expert. I think even the beginner should will be working on not stopping on his >> yeah okay >> account. So then I do think that is perhaps intention with stoicism with some exception that we'll talk about. I think there's there's at least one suggestion where on focus and what he calls seriousness that might be uh fitting for the progressor. But even the beginner is in pursuit of no mind maybe one way to put it. But be before we get into into that in too much detail, I do want to say there is one other at least one other kind of stopping that's worth mentioning. So we have this idea of stopping in time but also in terms of stopping in place and this has perhaps has to do with more of perspective. Uh so he writes when facing a single tree if you look at a single one of its red leaves you will not see all the others when the eye is not set on any one leaf and you face a tree with nothing at all in mind. Any number of leaves are visible to the eye without limit. But if a single leaf holds the eye, it'll be as if the remaining leaves were not there. So here stopping when the mind stops it's sort of carving up what is there into something smaller. And you can again see how that leads to ignorance by focusing on >> the parts you miss out on the whole. >> I mean there's part of that in stoicism, right? Like Epictitus has his metaphor of everything has two handles. If if my brother insults me, I can think about that in terms of how terrible it is to have such a rude brother. Or I can think about how I have this family obligation. I have this need to to help my uh people close to me. Um I have this opportunity to teach him a lesson. And so everything has two handles and you should always sort of pick it up by the better handle, the manageable handle. But that's a kind of a that is a comment about attention. It's like if we focus on the negative, we're going to miss the positive. Kind of obstacles the way is the same thing. There there is this it's not it's not the exact same idea, but there is this idea in stoicism of you know understanding the broader context, your position in nature, the broader possibilities, not missing the forest for the trees essentially. There's there's a warning of that here. >> Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. No, I think that's definitely related to stoisism. Marcus Aurelius always reminding himself to pay attention to the nature of things, you know, how this is related to that and of what whole this part uh is a part of. And I think that's uh related to these ideas for sure. Uh certainly. >> Yeah. >> Cool. So that's that's stopping. You can stop in time, stop in place. There's this perspectival element. I think there's also this those two elements can be present at the same time. uh he talked about how the mind can be taken in by externals or the stool externals. You can be taken by the sword by the sword of your opponent. I think that's similar to what I was talking about in terms of cycles or rhythm. You know, your your opponents setting the rhythm of of the battle and a combat type situation. But you can also think about this perhaps in conversation. you being taken in by another person's words and your mind is focused on on on what they say to the exclusion of uh anything else. >> Yeah, that makes sense to me. >> Yeah. So, it's good good to get that on the board, too. He he does write that not stopping should not be thought of as just mental agility. So, it would be a mistake to understand this simply as solarity. That's uh just a synonym for uh agility. Rather, it underscores the point that the mind should not be detained by things. It says that even with speed, it is essential that the mind does not stop. I think this is where we get into some classic Zen paradoxes. >> This idea that maybe you you think this idea is really cool. Now what I'm going to what I'm going to try to do is I'm going to train my mind not to stop because that's ideal. What does that mean? I should be mentally agile. You should be seeing things and each moment focusing on the whole whatever whole is present not their parts and so on. But uh as he writes even with speed it is essential that the mind does not stop and I think that's idea that the mind can stop itself. you know the focus is on the mind should not be detained by things not the mind should be agile and uh some classic I suppose end paradoxes about this is the mind that thinks about removing what it is within it will by the very act be occupied if one will not think about it the mind will remove these thoughts by itself and of itself become no mind to think I will not think this too is something in one's thoughts simply do not think about not thinking at all. >> Yeah. So the point there is that if you're focused on having no mind, you know, this is this is called the no mind. It's like the mind that isn't stopping the mind that isn't focusing on a tree or on a le a single leaf but taking in all of nature simultaneously. If you tell yourself, you know, I've got to free my mind. I've got to stop thinking. and I've got to let go of of these objects of my thought. Well, then you're focusing your mind on something. You're stopping. You're stopping on that kind of self-reerential goal, but that's still stopping. Yeah, absolutely. I think it's related to this idea of explicit monitoring. I've written read some uh sports psychology where you talk about performance. If you're performing, you can have in mind, you know, what you're doing at each step. You know, be monitoring. I'm doing this. I think this is related to uh you know doing this technique. If they do that then I'll do this technique and so on. And uh those thinking like that can sometimes be to the extent that it's possible to measure too rigid you know just interfering with what you're doing in instead of you know when you're performing trusting yourself to do the right move. You know that's that's you know that's a performance is where I suppose unconscious competence ideally comes to uh comes to the four. Yeah. I mean I think we've all achieved a I think we've all achieved a pleasurable state of Yeah. Yeah, I want to be conscious about flow because I understand that flow is not, you know, it's not the same thing as Zen Buddhist, no mind. But we've we've all achieved a kind of positive state of being, I guess, non-reflective, but also engaged and also hopefully skillful at some point. Yeah. And then there's both this point about it being, I think, enjoyable. Like those are the most fun. It's the most fun I have when I'm doing jiu-jitsu. But then there's also this thing about also actually the highest performance, right? Like people aren't people when they have those, as you were saying, those those kind of transcendent moments in sport, um they're not like, "Oh, then I thought this and I was I was thinking about doing this and then I did that." >> It's kind of just, you know, just kind of happened. I I I deed and I ducked. And you're you're explaining it post talk. you've got a you you know that athlete who has to watch the replay to say what happened um and then can explain it afterwards. >> Yeah, absolutely. >> Um I'm thinking of this Marcus Aurelius quote just trying to make some connections back to stoicism here. And so Marcus says quote, "No one can lose either the past or the future. How could anyone be deprived of what he does not possess? It is only the present moment of which either stands to be deprived. And if this is all he has, he cannot lose what he does not have. And I think there's this kind of point here when when I read Marquez saying that, it's that we stress a lot about the future. We stress a lot about the past, but that is us filling our mind with something. He wouldn't use that language, but it's us focusing on a part of the tree. And you know, if I don't focus on the past, as a stoic, the past literally can't hurt you. the pain of the past is all these, you know, regrets and false judgments we have about it. And then the anxiety around the future, it's the same thing. We're focusing on something that hasn't occurred yet. We're filling our mind with something. And so there's that stoic point of I think, you know, a real stoic goal is is living in the moment is not filling your mind with the past or the future. And I think there's some similarity. I think the difference here is is he's taking it even a step further where it's like don't even make your plan for today and don't even make your plan for three moves later in the sword battle. It's like be without mind all the time. So it's it's a bit more intense but there's there is that recognition in stoicism about you know obviously focusing your attention on the wrong things just leads to anxiety or regret. >> Yeah. So and can be another kind of ignorance. Mhm. >> Uh and I think you know they're related in that way where what causes suffering you know what the affliction is are false beliefs and uh those necessarily involve how one uses one one's attention in particular in the Marcus quotes you know that attending to the past and the future with false beliefs in mind false judgments cool yeah I think that's a useful connection the there asked so that's stopping and then there's the question okay so the mind should be trained not to stop or you have this idea that should not the mind should not be detained by things how do you get there or is it just meditating on coins or you get there by not trying there are some notes on training uh in this letter first and this is one place where I think there's some mention of the progressor there's a virtue of seriousness which is one aim with no distractions and I think he says this is can be harmful but it's also something that's suitable for a beginner perhaps you know this idea of even if you can't uh you know even if If you're going if the mind's going to stop, best to have it stop on a single aim with no distractions for that aim where that aim is well defined. I suppose other meditators talk about, you know, cultivating stable attention, that ability to hold your attention on a single object for long periods of time, uh, whatever occurs. and training that I think classically is is at least one way to make progress in developing one mind. Yeah. Is there I mean so the the idea here it's relating to the sword fighter right is like how do I train my attention to the no mind to get to know mind? Well the first way to do that is to focus on something with all of your mind. have one mind and like maybe that's like the person who becomes obsessed about music or sport or art or writing or reading or whatever your obsession is and then that is at least better than the distraction of having many minds. That's like that's like a step in the right direction of like training your attention. Is that is that the point you're making? >> Yeah, I think so. The analogy >> Yeah. The analogy he uses is usually the analogy of the cat where sometimes you need to chain down one's cat if you don't want it to eat perhaps a a bird or something like this or I forget why you want to chain down a cat but you could constrain your mind in the same way in order to practice your craft or do what needs to needs to be done. >> Okay. >> And that's developing stable attention. But ultimately that is not uh what one wants to do. I think he also uh another quote that I have from him is there's also a saying that goes is it is essential to lose the mind. This is quite different. The general drift is that when the mind is tied down it tires and like the cat is unable to function as it should. If the mind does not stop with things, it will not be stained by them and will be used well, you know. So, ideally, you want to be the cat who is free and doesn't need to be constrained. The effort not to stop the mind in just one place. This is discipline. Not stopping the mind is object and essence. Put nowhere, it will be everywhere. Even in moving the mind outside the body, if it is sent in one direction, it'll be lacking in nine others. If the mind is not restricted to just one direction, it will be in all 10. >> Okay. So, it's like I think this makes sense. The basic recommendation is to pick up a craft, get very good at at one thing or focus your attention on one thing and that will teach you a lot of lessons about controlling yourself, moderation, um focus and those lessons you can apply later. Whereas the person who grows up with no task, objective, mission, obsession, focus has no sort of training and attention in the same way. Uh so you have these two perhaps paths to no mind. Um, and he it seems like he's uh he's saying, "Look, if your mind is lost, if it's like the cat that's eating all the song birds and you don't know what to do, then perhaps you ought to chain it down. You ought to focus, narrow in on that one craft, as you say." Uh but ideally in my sense my my reading of him was ideally you you know you become the cat that doesn't need to be chained down and that means not det you know not letting one's mind be detained by things and that's sort of the Zen move where >> instead of needing to focus on a particular thing you're able to empty one's mind. He doesn't use this kind of language, but sometimes Zen uh in Zen, you know, you have the idea of non-doing, doing and this sort of thing. >> Okay. So, I'm so I'm so obsessed. I'm still really obsessed about this idea of progress. And I'm like, "Okay, so the progressor focus on one thing first and then becomes Zen." And that's what I was saying. But you're saying, "No, no, it's these two paths. One path is become obsessed about one thing." That's fine. It's better than nothing, but it's not the Zen path. The Zen path is to be both unchained and free. Uh, so there's this there's a fork in the road. These are different choices instead of a recommendation is what you're saying. >> I think so. Or it's at least not recommending a single path. Perhaps if you if one's in this a given situation, then you know, one ought to practice seriousness otherwise. >> Yeah. Okay. >> It's at least the idea that the ideal path is this more zen one. >> Yeah. I I definitely agree the ideal path is the more zen one. I was just thinking you had to focus first, but >> maybe it's that you can maybe it's that this is you know focus on one thing if you have to but ideally you kind of skip that step. Yeah. And I do think there is that there is that section on technique and principles. And I think it is important to say that even if one is practicing no mind for a given craft, you're not, you know, you're not immediately just going to be an expert swordsman. So they're going to be techniques and principles that are appropriate to train in whatever your >> Mhm. the skill level is it's just that you'll be bringing ideally sort of the the master and the beginner they sort of have bring the same mind to those those training sessions making it empty and not interfering you know with the technique or principles they're practicing during the day. There's this other interesting, we'll get on to some of the upshots in in a moment of of no mind, but it's making me think also about um jiu-jitsu again just because it's through this analogy of sword fighting where people are really dangerous when they come in on their first couple weeks because they're almost like fighting all on instinct. And I think there's like this one thing I do when I actually coach people is like when you start you're like a five out of 10, but you have to then become the shittiest person that uses technique which drops your skill to like a three out of 10. And then that three out of 10 though then you can become a good person with technique and you climb up to an eight nine 10 out of 10 fighter. And so there's this moment where you almost have to as you progress become worse because you start stopping and you start thinking and you know you become consciously incompetent and you pause and go ooh I should be doing this here. Ah this is the wrong way to move instead of just flowing. That's what made me think of as you said the beginner and the expert both both approach the sword fighting with no mind. Um and it's only the intermediate that's kind of constantly stopping and going oh which uh which of the three counters should I do here? Oh, which of the uh which of the two attacks are they doing? And it's like those are the kind of moments which stop you. >> Yeah, I think so. Or you have the sensation of getting in your head. I think that's a common >> Yeah. >> experience athletes or even public might happen during public speaking or other kinds of performance. Because what I'm saying is that the beginners don't get in their heads because they're like it's some sort of like fight to the death, you know, instinctive response. Typically with some some beginners, it's the intermediates that get in their mind a lot. >> Yeah, that's a good point. They don't even know what to be thinking about. So >> yeah, >> uh they're they're good on that front. So the notes on training, I think, are uh it's I suppose if you think about the Zen path, difficult. It's really an experiential matter and you know this idea of beginner's mind is is perhaps is perhaps useful. If you want to take the Zen path as if it were I think there are different there are certainly different perspectives on this but the if you want to take the Zen path think of it as maintaining the beginner's mind throughout your progress. I think in the best sense, you know, not in the sense that you come in and you're acting on, you know, in a jiu-jitsu context, you sort of go into fight or flight mode or start spazzing out. But at least on the in the positive sense where you're not interfering with your thinking, you're practicing the techniques and principles uh that are best to practice at that moment. Yeah, I like that idea. Keep in the beginner mind as long as possible or as as much as many context as possible. It's a good target. So that's those are the notes on training. Then in terms of upshots, there is some discussion towards the end of the letter that perhaps that we can take some notes from that are worth flagging. First, there's a nice use of stopping in conversation. You know, just an everyday experience. If there's some thought within the mind, though you listen to the words spoken by another, you'll not really be able to hear him. This is because your mind has been stopped with your own thoughts. So, of course, you know, the point isn't just to be uh an empty mind, a silent mind, not say anything, not think at all. Of course, it's important to converse with others, live with others. >> Yeah. >> I mean, you can do that through no mind. I like the idea of responding to somebody's talk as if it's like a sword fight, but like not not necessarily combative, but it's like, you know, if you're sitting here being like, "Oh, he's saying this, so I'm just going to respond with this response." It's like that sword analogy from the beginning, like, "Okay, this is the counter I'm going to do." and you're not actually attuned to the actual situation as opposed to like genuinely listening to what they're saying and speaking in um yeah giving them the response they deserve instead of just like dipping into the you can think about that in debate or argument about having these kind of prepackaged talking points. But you can also think about you conversations with friends where you kind of assume assume what they're saying. you don't really listen to the meaning behind it or, you know, you start to respond with a kind of a a a canned response. Again, I like that idea of being Yeah. being flowy, being flexible, being responsive in conversation in in creative kind of productive uh acts as much as combative ones. >> Yeah, absolutely. You know, not thinking about what you're going to say next. I think that's a classic case at least for me was thinking about oh these I'll say these two thing you know sort of stockpiling up your response as it were and and not paying attention to uh the words of the other person. >> Yeah. Which and then I got excited and cut you off when I was saying that. So I was doing the exact I was doing the exact thing. Um it's like it's hard not to do. >> Well maybe interruptions are fine. I was stopping and you next move. A virtue he talks about is total loyalty. Total loyalty is first in making your mind correct, disciplining your body, not splitting your thoughts concerning your Lord by even a Herod's breath, and in neither resenting nor blaming others. Do not be neglectful of your daily work. At home, be filial. Let nothing indecent occur between husband and wife. Be correct in formality. Do not love mistresses. Sever yourself from the path of sensuality. Be austere as a parent and act according to the way in employing underlings. Do not make distinctions on the basis of personal feelings. Employ men who are good and bind them to you. Reflect on your own deficiencies. Conduct the government of your province correctly and put men who are not good at a distance and very confusion really in a way. So perhaps I think for our purposes we can almost under we can understand it as a specific kind of role ethics and perhaps you know that per maybe there's an argument that if you want to play your roles well whether it's you know being a swordmaster in this case uh husband wife parent no mind is useful and I think that can sound a little abstract but I think with the example of the conversation we just talked about. You can see perhaps how I think that's a nice example that's sort of a proof as it were of sometimes thinking does get in the way of what you're trying to do and emptying one's mind is uh a good strategy for performing better. Yeah, I was thinking about you I totally agree that's very confusion and one thing we talked about there is about the emphasis on community or emphasis on these kind of social roles and so Epictitus we've talked about this in our episodes in role ethics but Epictitus talks about you have you know your role as a human being then you have the roles that you're born into like your family roles then you have the roles that like come up later in life spontaneous ously like maybe if you become an uncle or an aunt at an older age but then you you have these roles that you choose and I feel like so much of our maybe in western culture so much of our stoic ethics is like well what is my role here you know is my is my role as a friend more important than my role as a employee or do I think about my my role as a co-orker versus my uh passionate side project or like I think we're often kind of debating these chosen roles or even wrestling with them against our given rules. you know what's more important um you know the kind of the way I see myself or my relationship with my family you know my hobbies and passions or you know what my family expects of me and I think in a in a society that has that is less individualistic that is much more about social hierarchy it would be a lot easier and then you have very clear definitions very clear what a brother is supposed to do very clear what a husband or a wife is supposed to do. It would become a lot easier to kind of live that stoic role ethics. >> There would be a lot fewer questions about the conflicts between roles because the hierarchies would be pre-est you would know the hierarchy. They'd be pre-established. There'd be little ambiguity. The the roles you chose for yourself would be so clearly less important than your family roles or your social roles. So a I guess two points there. agree that it's it's like stoic role ethics, but B, it's probably easier to achieve no mind in a society that like you could be an entirely functioning person with no mind if you're just trying to like follow these pre-established rules, which would might be easier in in in a society where they have a lot more content than which than, you know, 2000's North America. I'm sure they had a lot more content in those roles in 1500's Japan. Mhm. Yeah, that's fair. That's certainly fair. Well, so those are some notes then on the unfettered mind, some upshots perhaps. And uh we've already tied it to stoicism a number of ways. Perhaps one framing that might be useful and I'm curious uh how you how you think about this is both stoicism and this version of Zen Buddhism in start with this idea of ignorance. This idea that so many of our thoughts judgments are false. You know the way we view reality think about reality is often completely mistaken. And the stoic response to that perhaps is we'll just improve your ability to think you know pursue knowledge whereas the Zen Buddhist strategy is just think less in a way you know just don't if 80% or more if most of your thoughts are not useful you know just empty the mind whereas a stoic approach is no perfect the mind don't empty it so what do you think about that framing I think that's I think that's the correct framing. I think that's the difference. I think this comes down to a difference in where ignorance comes from. So in stoicism I mean ignorance comes from our inability to correctly differentiate between true impressions and false impressions. Um and then I think that in Zen Buddhism it see ignorance seems to come from the mind you know stopping. um it pausing it like holding on certain things instead of taking in all all of reality. But yeah, I agree with that distinction. >> Yeah, it's almost as if you we have Zen Buddhism is more pessimistic about the capabilities of the human mind to capture reality in terms of a belief or a thought. Whereas as a stoic no human reason does give you sufficient power to see reality as it is. It's just exceptionally difficult. >> Yeah. It also makes me think that like like what would a I'm trying to think what would a zen stoic be like because stoicism has this view that there are these things called catalyptic impressions which just means that like our mind naturally is pulled by the things that are so obviously true. We don't need to be skeptical about the things that are obviously true. They have motivational force. Epictitus example of this is like, you know, you're cooking some soup, having an argument with the skeptic, just throw the soup in his face and see if he ducks, right? Like we we're struck by the truth of some things. And he said the skeptic in the moment goes, "Oo, that is hot soup and that will hurt." And there's just like there's no we're just playing some sort of silly philosophy game if we debate the truth of that proposition. Um, so maybe the Zen Stoic is something like I don't know it would be this this is this is a a leap, but it would be something like, you know, if you could empty your mind, your body would just respond to the catalyptic impressions anyway. And the only reason you have to wrestle with these like, oh, I was insulted and so therefore that's a bad thing and I have to train my my reflection ability to introduce stoic theory and recognize that it's that it wasn't a bad thing that I was insulted. It's like we we get into all these extra steps because your mind got stopped on the insult which you know is not a catalytic impression. It's not like a truth of the world >> that is obvious to humans naturally. And so maybe if you had no mind, you just kind of exist on this level of truth. But now you've you you actually you have to deprogram the issues that come about because you're stopping on things would be the the Zen argument. What do you think of that? >> No, I think that's a yeah, that's a great start to uh the Zen Stoic view as it were. And I think um probably the the next move would be some traditionally stoic remedies to these situation to uh you know this kind of stopping would be useful where others are not. So maybe uh I think something that that could be useful might be premeditio mealorum or negative visualization just immediately bringing to mind the reality that things could have been much worse or something like that that and that might be a way of seeing the whole perhaps you know the view from above per I think also does have a nice connection but perhaps there there is a kind of disputation that the Zen Stoic might not take, you know, I was insulted. Does that really harm me? Well, it only harms me if it harms my character. Did this harm my character? This sort of, you know, this these sort of thinking patterns and focusing on these thinking patterns might not wouldn't be the approach the Zen stoic would take. I would I would think they would just focus on perhaps mainly focus on the catalic impressions. You know what? just remember what happened or what's happening now and you'll see that the insult is does not harm you. >> Yeah. If you're if you're like if you're in the moment, if somebody insulted you five minutes ago and you're in the moment, where's the pain? Right? The stoic would say, you know, where is the where is the injury? There is no injury unless you think back to the past and you construct some sort of story. So, yeah, that's that's a great point. I've never actually thought about that. That that that's a zen stoic argument. I mean um trademark pending. But like um that it also fits within normal stoicism too. This idea of like you know if you just pause and just be like where's your injury? You can't find it. You have to make appeal to this past situation that occurred because obviously you're not damaged right or if there is an injury the stoke would say it's just your own stupid thoughts right now. It's your own it's your own fretting. >> Yeah. Yeah. It seems like the sort of the ultimate Zen stoic technique would be uh you have that dialogue with Epitus where he's talking with the student about you know someone so and so went to jail and that's terrible and epic just said no they went to jail and that's just sort of the move >> that the Zento would be repeatedly making I think just >> just constant goldfish memory >> no and it's bad no they just went to jail I just don't get to the second part of that sentence before I forget um Yeah, I totally agree. And it seems appealing in a way. >> Yeah, I Yeah, I think that that is a there is something appealing to that perhaps a reminder not if more of the Stoics's sort of uh I guess disputation based dialectical strategies aren't working. That's not the only uh path that SOA can take. And I do think there is something that I want to emphasize to this idea of unconscious competence or you know trust that trusting that you can act or ascent correctly without monitoring because of stoic training. And perhaps you know you do have this idea in stoism that's important to reflect on what happened what actually occurred but perhaps sometimes that can turn into a kind of monitoring >> that isn't useful when the Zen stoic might encourage you know just simply trusting that you'll do what's required in the moment without monitoring and you know there's a time for reflection But it's uh perhaps not as frequent as as some people make it out to be. >> Yeah. It's it's it's almost this inversion. So you talked about this the the the Zen state as being maybe more cynical and the stoic state maybe being more optimistic or about our capacity to kind of use reason to get to truth. But I think there's also something a bit more optimistic in the Zen picture because the the Zen picture is like our default is looking at the whole forest and you're stopping yourself on the leaf. And I almost feel like the stoic picture is like our default is to look at the leaf. But if you train enough, you know, because you said view from above, living in accordance with nature, understanding your role in the universe, momento my you can you can train yourself to understand the forest and to see the forest. And so like the the the Zen person is almost like don't mess it up, you know, don't get in the way. And now we kind of have to unprogram the fact that you've messed it up. Where I think the stoic is more, you know, that stoic developmental picture where it's like you start with concern of yourself as a baby. You develop concern for your family, then eventually you develop this concern, empathy, connection with the entire world. It's more of a developmental picture. Um yeah, I think of David Foster Wallace has this uh that speech this is water which is very quickly this idea that you know the the the fish doesn't notice it's in water and part of ethical training is developing the attention to recognize that you're in water or like recognize the parts around you that are true that you kind of lose sight of. Mhm. >> And it seemed to me that it seems to me the Zen argument is like, yeah, the fish obviously realize it's in water until it gets focused on other stuff. And so you're trying to get back to that. That is the no the no mind is is a good state basically. That's that's all I'm trying to say. >> Um where I don't think the stoic the stoic it's like the no mind isn't good, but the very strong mind, the very refined mind has a lot in common with the no mind. Mhm. Cool. Well, there's much more to talk about here, but of course, we're running up against time, so uh perhaps we'll end it there. Um, let us know what you think. If you like us to cover more uh elements or books like this, more works like this. Maybe we'll move the five rings up in the queue. I'm not sure. >> Yeah. >> I did. You have do you have anything else you wanted to end on or uh to note? No, I'm just googling Zen Stoic to see if somebody already there is the Zen Stoic podcast. So, we're not we are not the first. We didn't invent it. Um, that's funny. Um, but no, I I always respect for any sort of philosophy as a way of life. Glad to have read this one, Caleb. Great recommendation. Um, yeah, so enjoyed it. >> Cool. I'll just end with uh some notes on the failure of explanation. I think useful and also very zen. One may explain water but the mouth will not become wet. One may expound fully on the nature of fire but the mouth will not become hot. Without touching real water and real fire, one will not know these things. Even explaining a book will not make it understood. Food may be concisely defined, but that alone will not relieve one's hunger. One is not likely to achieve understanding from the explanation of another. All right. Thanks, Michael. >> Awesome. >> Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at Stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions.
