---
title: "The Life of Plato (Episode 195)"
slug: the-life-of-plato
episode_number: 195
youtube_id: Oxz5URAaeX8
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oxz5URAaeX8
upload_date: 2025-08-05
duration: 53:04
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Michael Trombllay >> and I'm Caleb Montiveros. >> And today we're doing a book review, but it's a it's a philosophical book review. So, we're talking about Plato of Athens, a life in philosophy, which is a new biography of Plato by Robin Waterfield. For those that don't know who that is, Robin is a prolific and I think quite excellent translator. He's translated a number of Greek works including a number of stoics. Um he has new editions of Marcus Aurelius and Epictitus available both of which um have notes and commentary. And so this is a biography of Plato but in many ways it's also an exploration of his ideas and the connection between Plato's thinking and his own life. We'll get into this in the episode, but you know, Robin does a really good job saying what we know about Plato's life with certainty and making it clear where there's maybe um myths or exaggerations, but at the end of the day, we we don't have, you know, beatby beat uh portrayal of Plato's life here. We've got some key events. We've got some historical context, but I think the real value of this book is how it connects those things we do know and the context we do understand with Plato's thinking. Um, and I think actually I I really enjoyed this book. Interested in what you think, Kilo, as as we talk about it. But it helped me understand Plato as a person, kind of bring Plato back down to earth because with someone like him or Socrates, you think of them as these kind of myth mythical feature uh mythical people that you know couldn't possibly be real, couldn't have been, you know, born or been the kind of person you could have attended a lecture of and kind of grounds them in the real, which I really liked. and yeah, does a great job of breaking down how Plato's life informed his philosophy, which we'll get into. Anything to add before we jump into it? >> Yeah, I really enjoy Waterfield's annotated translation of the meditations. It's really nice to go through his version of the meditations and go through the the footnotes and uh there he'll provide lots of useful context. And in in a way I thought about this this book takes almost a similar approach where he's describes the context of Plato's life. you know what's going on during these different periods of uh Plato's life while also discussing his ideas his works and then also and also includes sort of thorough detours about you know what's the uh which of Plato's works are legitimately works by Plato um and and and this sorts of thing and you know what's the actual amount of uh you know what's the what kind of reliable evidence do we have about events in his life So, I think that that's really useful. If you're sort of expecting a biography and a sense of, you know, some epic story of Plato's life, then uh I think this is not that book, but it could pair nicely with that book, which I'm not sure if exists. You know, writing an actual biography of Plato is a a daunting task. So, I don't know if there are any good epic biographies of his life, but um I think this is a good one in the same sense. It's nice to nice to understand the context of Plato's life and uh I think there there are a number of things I learned about that context about some some you know specific detours waterfield takes as well. So I I generally enjoyed it. I >> mean when you were saying that Kell I was thinking Plato's not really well known either for having an epic life. It's almost you know he he had epic thoughts, epic ideas. Um, and so this is almost, you know, an overview of those epic ideas and how the life informed those. Um, as you said, it's a daunting task, I think, just because we don't have the evidence to support it. Um, and you could probably do something in further detail if you had the evidence, but it really was I he think so I I like that we get into the thinking here. Um, and I like that I I enjoyed how he made those connections to yeah, Plato's thought. So the way I'm going to break up this episode is I'm going to do three sections. We'll do Plato's early life, his middle period, you know, his middle age, and then his later life. And I'll start with an overview of Plato's life during that time. So what he was doing in his early, middle, and late periods. and then connect that to the thinking or the writing or the ideas that he was presenting and talking about at those times and try to make those connections or summarize those connections that Waterfield skillfully made. This is partly review, partly summary. I think it's going to lean on the side of summary, but I I think um you know, a review of a book like this, if it can make us think interesting things and it can make me come away with some interesting themes, then it's a good book. So, I'm going to dig into the themes that it made me think and the thoughts that it left me with and you know if they strike they did strike me as interesting and hopefully they strike the listeners as the same way as being interesting and if so then I think it it's a good book. I think it's a good way to review it. Maybe one way to frame it is, you know, what can you expect to get out of this podcast if you listen to it is first of course a basic understanding of Plato's life. But we'll be trying to set that context trying to paint a richer picture of uh who he was and how that pertains to his philosophy and of course the philosophies that came after like stoicism. So maybe that's a that's a useful framing. >> Great. Let's jump into it. >> Let's do it. >> Okay. So, in terms of Plato's early life, so Plato was born between 428 and 423 BC in Athens to a rich aristocratic family. That's something that Waterfield does a good job explaining is that look, in order to have the leisure time to, you know, dedicate yourself to reading, writing, philosophy, almost all of these people were were pretty wellestablished, pretty powerful, had that kind of leisure time available to them. At the time of his birth, Socrates would have been in his 40s and Athens would have been one of the most powerful and prosperous citystates in Greece. So born into this this really successful um dynamic Athenian environment. But Plato's childhood was also a time of significant change. In 404 BC when Plato would have been in his early 20s, Athens lost the Pelpeneisian War to Sparta. So Sparta defeated them in the war and Sparta set up a coalition of powerful Athenians that were sympathetic to Sparta to rule over Athens after the Spartans left. So they set they set up the this this coalition and then the Spartans left and they were like you you're going to rule in our place. You're going to maintain control for us. And this coalition was the 30 tyrants which included Plato's uncle Charmades and Critius his first cousin once removed. Critius was even one of the leaders of the 30. So you can see there also the the group of elites was was rather small. You know, Plato's one of these elites. Um they're picking from these elite and powerful to set up this coalition of the of the 30 and Plato has two immediate family members in just that 30 people, let alone the people working working with them or collaborating with them. Um, the 30 maintained power for only 8 months, but it was a really terrible time. They killed 5% of Athens population and they're known for confiscating wealth, so killing people and taking their possessions. The Athenians fought back, revolted against them, and they were overthrown. And that's why they had such a short rule. So in some ways which is something that Waterfield points out the hatred for the 30 was held against Socrates and may have contributed to his execution. Socrates had been the tutor of Critius and was considered to be closely associated with him. So Socrates was seen as being sympathetic or involved with the 30. Um, and so there was there's this, you know, often when we talk about the apology, we read it in kind of a philosophical sense where Socrates is pursuing truth and people don't like the pursuit of truth, but that's the story that Plato's presenting there. But then there's this also this historical reading where there's this this the overthrow of the 30 and then Socrates is kind of his association with them is held against him. Um, this can also be a kind of a radicalizing moment for Plato in a way. So Plato in a very short period of time, you think he's relatively young man, he's in his early 20s, old enough to understand what's going on, not old enough to be powerful or influential in these situations. He sees both tyranny in the form of the 30, you know, involving some of his immediate family members. He sees the overthrow of that tyranny by democracy. But then he also sees the consequences of democracy in the execution of Socrates by basically popular vote. Right? Socrates gets you know he he's convicted and when you're convicted that's goes to a jury a very large jury u I believe of 100 100 Athenian citizens. And so in that way you've got this kind of popular vote against the life of um Socrates. So after the death of Socrates, you know, these formative moments in Plato's youth, he ends up traveling quite a bit. He went to Meggera in western Greece to study with Uklid of Megara. He went he returned to Athens around 394 BC to serve in the military for a year and fought in the Corinthian war. He traveled to southern Italy to study with the Pythagoreans. He visited Syracuse, which was under the rule of a tyrant, Dianisis. He took on Dion, the brother-in-law of the tyrant, as a pupil. And then around the age of 40, he returns to Athens and forms the academy, um, where he'll do his most substantial writing and teaching that we associate with him today. So, what are the kind of philosophical insights or thoughts from his early life? Well, the first and probably most important is that what I already touched on is that Plato grew up in this time of political unrest where he saw both the limitations of tyranny in the 30 and the mob mentality of democracy and the execution of Socrates. And so Plato, there's this historical biographical reading of Plato where he becomes actually very interested in what constitutes a good ruler, very interested in what constitutes um you effective governance of the state. And that theme is explored really in in in the republic which we'll get to later. But that that plants this seed in Plato of okay you know what role does a what role really does philosophy play? Um and how do we find something better than democracy and tyranny which both have these major issues. There's often this fun fact where it's like Plato thinks that you know democracy is almost as bad as tyranny or at least he argues that in um the republic but you think about it in the context of this where tyranny is the is the rule of the one but then democracy is just the whims of of the many there there wasn't really here I I it's not necessarily any better and I mean we see this kind of with internet culture cancel culture call what you want but you know there's not necessarily this value just because a lot of people think it at the same time. It's not necessarily right or helpful and that's what Plato think is attuned to here. Another idea which I which I already hit on was this ability to do philosophy being so tied to wealth. I just think we're really lucky to have access to the resources we have today. You know, Caleb, we don't even live in the same city and we're talking we get to talk about philosophy every week on this podcast. you know, I don't have to travel somewhere and go to a school, let alone be one of the people that can afford to travel somewhere. The there's just so much access to books, even even the ability to read. You can go over anything, but just like anybody can do philosophy now. It's so accessible. I just I'm very grateful for that. And that's not it's not something for just the 1%. And then another interesting thing unrelated to those previous two is that Waterfield discussed the sofists charitably. I didn't get into that biograph in in the biography, but the sophists were this maybe intellectuals. I mean, Sophos means wise. So, this intellectual group in Athens around the same time as Socrates and Plato. And Plato mocks them because they're the people who teach skills for money. So, they'll teach you how to be a good play, good or orator, how to be good at rhetoric, how to convince people of things. like they they were um somebody you could pay to basically do this kind of intellectual work either to teach you or to do it for you. And um Waterfield I thought made this insightful analogy that you can kind of think of them almost like a college like they're they're people who taught practical skills for money. You know, it was valuable to learn how to write compelling speeches back in the time. It was valuable to learn how to um yeah be convincing in your arguments, how to how to speak well. And so you Plato often fights against them or disparages them as being not in pursuit of truth. And that's true in one sense, but I don't know, maybe I gave them a bit of a bad rap. That was that was another thing I was thinking. Um so that's a lot. That's Plato's early life. What what did you think Gale? >> Yeah, that's interesting. Especially on the sophists there's you know Waterfield points out that there's a number of them there are different some are more philosophically sophisticated others perhaps you could think of almost as teaching life hacks or something like this um but there then there is that also that that point that you bring out that Athenian society incentivized being good at rhetoric and in some sense uh being a talented intellectual because it was a democracy and there was value in being able to convince your fellow citizens of a given thing. And I think, you know, that that's certainly important. And there's um I think uh Waterfield, you know, as you say, does point out that probably the most influential the sort of formative influences on Plato is of course Socrates being a student of Socrates. But then those two events, the uh rule of the 30 tyrants and then five years, I think it's about five years later, the execution of Socrates, which does set up also that dichotomy between tyranny and democracy. And it is it is worth thinking about that uh if you think about the different forms of government really the the word democracy tended to be described the bad form of rule of the many throughout most of history. And if you think about Aristotle who of course came after Plato, but Aristotle saw democracy essentially as the bad form of rule of the many where a republic was, you know, the the much better better form, the idealized version. And then you have, you know, ruled by the one, the bad form of that tyranny, the better form is monarchy, ruled by uh, you know, an excellent ruler and so on. So that's uh I think that's maybe also some some useful uh context here. I mean yeah the context there as I'm understanding is just when we think of the criticism of democracy we think of it in an Athenian context which is the votings were restricted to a subsection of people citizens they had a certain degree of power so it was already restricted to a subgroup and then there was not you know there there was often these I'm not an expert in Athenian democracy but I know there was these wide ranging votes so you almost end up in this kind of like survivor situation often where very serious situations come down to your ability to kind of um make deals or convince people through speeches as you said um instead of any sort of pre-established rule of law. I mean we just know people are besides being ignorant people are petty as well and flawed in all the many different ways people are petty and so when we're talking about democracy um we're not talking we are talking about that in the Athenian context. Well, yeah. And I think pro I mean historically people might think democracy at least as it's spoken about in the modern context is probably worse than the Athenian one. But the uh just because there are more people I don't I mean historically I don't think people objected to Athenian democracy because it was so restricted. It would it would be the second bit you point out that it's a bad form. It's bad for making decisions. You know it's ruled by the mob essentially. and you have the Athenians deciding to go do these terrible things when Plato's much younger. There's an expedition to Syracuse that on reflection was pretty stupid. And then of course there's the killing of Socrates essentially for a not especially good reasons. You know, it's a sort of idea that the mob can be controlled by either its own madness, its own logic, or it can be captured by demagogues. Perhaps that's how it's related to this, you know, the classic criticism of the sophist that, you know, the sofas isn't focused on truth really. They're focused on rhetoric in an art of itself and that turns out to be, you know, what can you do? What can you say >> to to wield power over the mob and so on. Well, maybe to to bring into a stoic context, the sophist is interested has dedicated their life to an indifferent of this this rhetoric and the platonic ideal is to dedicate your life to the good to virtue. And then >> as a virtuous person, you then rule >> where the sophist says, I'm I'm pursuing ruling or persuasion. You know, if I get that being a good person or a bad person, what does that matter? Yeah, great points. So moving to the next phase in Plato's life. I mean that that already was like wow this is really interesting. One thing we don't do in philosophy or not when you're trained as a philosopher is you don't really think biographically. It's not really part of the training that I received. You do a bit in classics but in philosophy it's not really a biographical interest. It's like it's it's really is a history of ideas not history of people. So already that thinking of Plato as being inspired by those conditions was was interesting for me insightful. But when we get to the middle academy, so I'll talk about those years next. So in 383 BC, so we think about Plato as being, you know, in his in his early 40s, he his focus is on developing the academy. And so this is a period of time where he teaches many students including Aristotle who arrives in 367. And Waterfield discusses the, you know, what the academy would have been like. So students would congregate, they would eat together, they would debate, they would argue, they would listen to lectures. It was a proper school for philosophy. It was a period of time when Waterfield describes it as uh a research academy, a place that encouraged disagreement debate. It was not a place for a blind adherence to theory. And so I I think sometimes there can be this reading of Aristotle is like Aristotle leaves Plato uh and then goes and it's so he must not like Plato because he criticizes him or he talks about why Plato's wrong or he goes against the theory of the forms. And another way of reading this is that Plato was actually, you know, he was inculcating in here uh a real research mindset, a pursuit of the truth. And it wouldn't have been seen necessarily as a bad thing that Aristotle deviated or that other people kind of had their own nuances to the theory or or different ways of approaching it. Um, and I thought that was cool. It's it's it's not a place where you go and Plato lectures at you and you are trying to understand the thought of Plato. it it's still very much being formed, being debated and being constructed. So this is also where Plato writes his middle dialogues. This introduces his thinking above and beyond Socrates. So the republic and the symposium, for example, are from this period. And I think there are two key connections between Plato's thinking and his philosophy that I I want to call out. First, people often frame Plato as having a early, middle, and later period. The early period is Socratic in his writing. It ends in confusion. You think of this like the euthiferro. There's no real answer. They they say, you know, what is justice? What is py? They don't get to an answer. The middle period introduces Plato's ideas but retains the influence of Socrates. It's the republic. Socrates is there. He's a character. There's debate, but there's a right answer. And the later period becomes very prescriptive. that's like Plato's laws. Um maybe Socrates is in the book, the dialogue, maybe he's not. And it's often very monologu. Um we can graft these periods then onto Plato's life. At first he's developing his thinking. He's really influenced by his interactions with Socrates. He's a young man. He's wanting to share what he's learned from Socrates, which is the Socratic method. Then he returns and he establishes the academy in the middle period. Um, and he's he's he's the a successful and established writer, but he's not a he's not the head of a school that wants to just pontificate. He's someone still developing his thought. He's he's the leader of this research academy. And so, he's getting more prescriptive in his writing, which I I think is is cool. And then Waterfield also, besides that idea, Waterfield also frames Plato's Republic, which is thought to be his best work, as a response to Plato's childhood. Plato wants to answer the question of good government. He rejects democracy and tyranny and in the republic he argues for an enlightened rule by a philosopher. We also have a connection to Marcus Aurelius here who for many was considered the closest we got to that ideal. So we've done we've done some discussions on Plato's thought. Republic I think an amazing book. I'd recommend anybody here to read it. Um although can be a bit dense. I read it chapter by chapter over the course of a seminar in graduate school which was really the right way to do it. you read 30 pages and you go talk about it one uh not recognize not everyone has that opportunity but Plato puts forward in that this conception of the philosopher king which is like what's the best way to rule well it's somebody who rules in the pursuit of truth somebody who leads and governs um in pursuit of the good who also actually understands the good is wise doesn't pursue doesn't pursue the good and is mistaken and often we think about Marcus Aurelius as maybe the closest we got to that someone who had all the power but actually genuinely tried to live in accordance with the good and was pretty wise got pretty close at the same time. Um so that's an interesting connection to stoicism. Anything on that period of time before we get into some other themes? I I think the mapping on like if if you're thinking about the going through some of the Socratic dialogues mapping on to the middle earlier or later period is certainly a useful thing to do and I don't think my impression from there is that waterfield was generally in line with what most other >> yeah I think so >> philosophers and classics I had read on um on that question. So I think that that's that that is what most people tend to think and is grouping of the the relevant uh dialogues there can can be can be useful. Um probably one of the most interesting discuss elements of of this for me was when he was talking about whether Plato had formed a proper school and sort of juxap juxtaposing you know Plato's academy against later henistic schools which do become more dogmatic. I would say the Stoics are an example of the school of a school which became more dogmatic in particular around in in that classical sense in terms of defining what they believe you know this is what stoicism is and constraining the school in that way whereas Plato didn't have I as you know there there was no document that really wrote down defined what it was to be a Plonist and said his writings were much more open-ended in these forms of dialogues uh which I I I do think sets him apart from Zeno and certainly Chrissipus who helped define stoic dogma as it were. So that I think that's that's uh interest certainly it's something he left to his followers perhaps and perhaps there's something in that in that style that dialogue heavy style focus on conversation that plays a part in uh you know the longativity of his of his work really and also push back against early on or push back in against him being a dogmatic figure. >> Yeah. Yeah, I mean one thing that I'm not an expert on neoplatonists, but neoplatanist is a you know that's a school of philosophy that came a while after Plato looked to Plato as the source of truth and authority and tried to interpret his writings and yeah you you talked about the ambiguity as leading to the the popularity of Plato's work and I just think an example neoplatanists are not that popular I don't know which is this attempt to like dogmatize Plato, define Plato say no this is 100% what he meant where there's a lot of joy in reading Plato as I mean in a way it's this two of the greatest thinkers you get Socrates and Plato the ambiguity of Socrates um and then the development of the thought but people aren't that excited about you know there's a reason people don't like the laws or some of Plato's later works are or his are less popular than the earlier in the middle ones which is what you're pointing Yeah. And we'll talk more about the laws. Waterfield ex thinks that's uh an essential part of Plato's canon body of work as it were. And uh and you're right, that doesn't get as much attention as uh Plato's other works. >> Great. So, three other things that I thought reading this section about the middle of his life. First there's this portion Waterfield talks about where Plato was cautious about writing because it was passive. So but but like Plato was cautious about consuming writing um engaging with written texts. But what Waterfield points out historically is that actually engaging with written text was listening to something being read aloud. um people wouldn't sit down and read because there wouldn't be you there wouldn't be access to kind of a larger library that wasn't the the method of consumption. So Plato was actually worried when he talks about the passivity of uh writing. He was actually worried about listening. Um I thought that was an interesting point. And so it's this contrast between listening to content, consuming content, and then engaging in conversation. And I thought that I pointed out in my notes here, maybe this is similar to podcasts. And I'm not trying to say there's not a value to listening to podcasts. Obviously, that's, you know, we're doing this because we think there is one, but it's pointing out this tight difference between listening and then actually being engaged in conversation. And, you know, I I listen to podcasts. I'm not trying to criticize people listening to this. I think it's a great tool, but Plato's pointing out, you know, what what is a step above this and better than listening or consuming is actually being in a philosophical environment having those conversations. And that's something I think in our kind of like, you know, I I I I listen to a lot of podcasts. I watch a lot of YouTube. I there's a lot of just consumption going on and thinking about opportunities in my life to replace that with conversation. It's part of the reason why I enjoy this podcast so much and why I tend to remember the stuff we talk about in this podcast and internalize it a lot better. >> Um >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, just to add on to that, I think this also connects to the idea that's common across Greor Roman philosophy which is that happiness is an activity. You know philosophy is an activity. It's not it's not as much a state that you can download as it were. So you know a philosopher is just is someone who n is just engaged in in dialectic right philosophical reasoning >> and um sometimes it's much more fun to to consume I suppose but uh that's that's not what the philosopher aims at. >> Yeah. You got to you got to get into more debates what Plato's saying. You got to be you got to be like Socrates. Got to bug people in the middle of the street. They ask them what they mean by the words they use. But I guess Socrates is a great example of that. Um I was teasing a bit, but he he's doing what Plato thinks we should be doing. Um another point here, Plato's just ripping into all of our hobbies. Um Plato criticized poetry as being an imitation of reality. This is a very famous argument in the Republic. You know, you think about the the allegory of the cave. There's the representations of the world versus the world itself. And poetry is this world of representation which takes us away from truth imitate. It's this poor imitation. But Waterfield again with historical insight points out that poetry was where dramatic stories were told. So this is this is not Plato criticizing you know lyrical poetry. This is him criticizing television or movies today. Right? He he's criticizing again consumption again watching stories of heroism watching stories of great people I guess instead of going out and and becoming that or doing that yourself or learning from engaging with real people just cautioning what I mean and and and this you can see as as there's different ways to read Plato here but there's this this just this basic point I think about media literacy right like questioning the stories the themes the ideas we're getting from the movies and TV we're watching being cautious about it recognizing that it's not reality but a representation and that's different which I thought was interesting people don't normally talk about Plato as um you know talking about television they're more just like ah he thinks poetry is bad >> yeah and there's there's that classic I think even Cicero has something to the effect of you know Plato was a poet against all the poets or something like this line like that because Plato was a poet and also his he clearly was a excellent writer uh artist and uh I think that that makes the his targets certainly a little clearer. Maybe it's better not to think of it as poetry as we uh think about it but more these epic stories or popular entertainments and such. But but I would also add that in addition to I think a non-planist could could could get on board with that and be like yeah of course stories distort reality in a certain way but there is also that idea that the more you know we could get into platonic metaphysics which can be a bit confusing but you know if you think about what's ultimate reality for Plato it's the forms and so on you know these perfect purified uh versions of things which a which which a story is not. You know, that's what's that's what a philosopher is trying to to get at through, you know, through reasoning. That's what they're attempting to know. >> Well, is that something like Yeah. when we're trying I mean that maybe that goes back to the craft analogy. I'm thinking about this for the first time, but if you want to understand the craft of goodness, look to real people who have encountered real situations and navigated them well. Don't look to fictional characters. In some way, the fictional character is is helpful. They're displaying something, but uh maybe you're not, you know, you're not learning about the reality of virtue, that craft or that practice in the same way as, you know, looking to a real person doing it. I think that's the case. I think always a real person is going to be a better displayer of the craft than a fictional character. >> Yeah, that could be right. That could be right. And so one other idea I had here was an interesting anecdote was that as a form of pedagogy, Plato would lay out all the work that was required to belong to the academy on the first day. Like people would students would rock up and he'd be like, if you want to be a philosopher, this is what it takes. You got to do all this. And uh his reasoning was that this would excite the proper students and discourage the bad ones. I think that's just a fun little story. I think about that when I tell people about PhDs as being should I do a PhD and my advice is generally no you should probably not probably not and I generally think that like if if if someone is going to do well in a PhD they have to be the kind of person that is it doesn't make the advice wrong but they have to not be discouraged by that kind of advice and I think there's something here to Plato saying which is you know if if you're there for the right reasons this idea of reading and debating and you know doing all the things philosophers do is going excite you and that that much work is going to discourage the the people who aren't suited for it. >> Yeah, I like this heristic. I think it's a good uh good filter. People I think there's also that line with business, right? People ask, you know, should I start a business? Should I be an entrepreneur? And you know, should I start a startup? Many people advise just the default answer no. You know, if you're the kind of person who's going to do it, then that won't dissuade you. But if you are thinking about you know that sorts of negative feedback and of course maybe you know the reality of starting a business what have you dissuaded you from doing it then perhaps that's not uh that means it's not the path for you which is fine you know there are different paths different roles and so on as the stoics would say. >> Yeah. So good little good little heruristic as you said. >> Yeah. Um oh one other did you have anything else but I did want to call out one other sort of theme that I took from >> yeah so so one other theme there's a nice section where waterfield I think is sort of around here where he talks through some of the basic ideas of platonic philosophy and he does call out that platonic philosophy was in a real sense religious we might even say spiritual but he says Plato had come to hold the startling view that philosophy itself had a religious purpose assimilation to God and uh also calls out that noted that there's these aspects of Platonic philosophy that are have a lot in common with spiritual ideas you know that immortality of the soul this idea that the point of philosophy is to purify the soul you know achieving a communion with God and breaking free of you know this constant cycle of reincarnation I think you know Plato did believe in reincarnation And uh I think that you know these are important aspects of his thought. And sometimes I know if I don't know if if you've had this experience before, but I've been in philosophy type classes where people are teaching Plato and they sort of almost make him seem like a secular rational modern type person. Uh not exactly modern but uh water down some of his uh more some of his metaphysics in a way. uh and I think it is uh important to to remember both sort of the ambition that Plato had for philosophy you know this idea of assumation to god I mean what a what a mission you know what a purpose for for a craft and also uh the fact that he did have these really religious views about the immortality of the soul of course and uh and reincarnation and such >> yeah my my philosophy grad school anecdote for that I don't know if I have a I don't know if I had strong enough opinions about Plato to think that he was being watered down or, you know, the the religious aspects were being downplayed. But then when you read The Republic and you get to the end of it and it's just, as you said, just full-blown discussions of like reincarnation into animals, um, you know, like selecting selecting where your soul is going to go. And I was like, whoa, this is this is heavy. Um, this is getting, uh, as you said, pretty ambitious. And that train philosophy as a preparation of our soul for death. It's almost funny how the stoics I'm taking back to stoicism. The stoics don't believe in reincarnation. They don't believe in an afterlife. In some ways, everything's material. We have a piece of the universe within us. That piece of the universe moves and takes a different form. These are these are definitely stoic ideas. But like uh your soul does not leave the body and remain in a unified state or in any has any sort of identity to it. And so when they talk about philosophy as a preparation for death, they almost take it like well death is a scary thing and like it matters that you handle death well because it's impressive. where Plato um Plato talked about and certainly Plato Socrates talked about philosophy as a preparation for death because your soul would literally leave your body. Um and it would then be more exposed to, you know, the forms and the divine and it would only be prepared to handle and deal with that and navigate that world successfully without the shackles of the body. if you'd been practicing philosophy well. Um, so yeah, just occurring to me now how that philosophy as a preparation for death means a much very different thing to Plato than it does for the Stoics, even though they both carry that Socratic idea forward. >> Yeah, that's a good point. That's a good point. Uh, a similarity that's ultimately grounded in a difference, I suppose. >> Yeah. Um, cool. Yeah, great ideas. So, moving to the later life. This to me was I thought the middle part was kind of boring. Not the book wasn't boring, but Plato's middle life is kind of boring because he just kind of sits and writes and does his hard thinking. He does philosophy, runs his school. >> Yeah. It's more interesting to read about what he wrote than I suppose read about his life. >> Yeah. >> At this point. Yeah. >> And then in the later life, he goes and does some interesting things again. Things I didn't realize he did. So after almost 20 years of teaching in the academy, Plato returns to Syracuse. So remember we said at the start he he um went to Syracuse. He tutored the um Dion who I believe was the the brother-in-law of of the tyrant. Um yes. And so, um, he he's asked to return to Syracuse by Dion, his old his old, uh, student to tutor the new the new tyrant, Dianicius II, the child of the of the previous one. And Waterfield calls this section of the book idealism tempered, which is, you know, very direct in in what he thinks is occurring here. So, Plato attempts to convert this tyrant to philosophy and is unsuccessful. Dianicius II appreciates the cultural value of having great thinkers in his court. He like really likes the cultural cache of having the um intellectual elite around and he's happy to show off Plato but he doesn't take on Plato as an actual mentor. Um he makes some progress Plato Plato Dion and Dianicius attempt to write a revised constitution for Syracuse. So Plato does have some influence, but Dianicius ultimately rejects the project. He banishes Dion from Syracuse in disgrace. Plato has to convince Dianus to let him go. Rumors circulate that Plato's been killed by the tyrant. So things basically blow up. Plato has to ask to leave. His friend gets kicked out. And so Plato's project to produce a philosopher king fails. Um he returns to the academy and spends the rest of his life producing his later dialogues. Fitting with the theme of idealism tempered, Waterfield frames Plato's last work in the context of his Plato's biography, Plato's life. Dialogues like laws have much less socratic conversation. They're more prescriptive and less about a hypothetical city or utopia. Plato in his later years he and closer to his death he turns much more to the ground much more to these grounded questions of how to actually rule and set up a country and less to the ideal form of the hypothetical city state and so that's that's that idealism tempered forget about the republic how can I as a philosopher actually help tyrants actually help rulers run better cities and in a way it's h it's humbling Right? Plato, we don't we don't have a step-by-step account here, but Plato doesn't achieve his project. He doesn't, you know, demonstrate the political smarts to navigate the situation well. He can't translate his idealistic thinking into prescriptions that will be executed. Yeah. Yeah. And so for me that that's that's uh it's kind of interesting to think of old Plato, you know, mature, already wrote the Republic Plato, caught up in this this courtroom drama, caught up in um you know, this sphere of influence of a tyrant. And then I also couldn't help but think about the parallels with Senica, both Senica and Plato spending their later years trying and arguably failing to give practical and moral advice to a tyrant. I don't see this connection made very often, if at all. But both of them, yeah, two great thinkers engaged in the same project unsuccessfully. Not sure what that tells us about philosophy. Maybe it just tells us something more about the nature of tyrants. Maybe they got further than other people would. I guess we'd need some counter example of people who actually did were successful with tyrants if they even exist. But that's this that's the later story is, you know, he he builds up this theory, he builds up this thought, he says, "I'm going to put it into practice. I'm going to make some change." And he he doesn't he doesn't succeed. And so he turns with a bit more attention to these actual practical questions of how to rule uh an actual city. Yeah, I think it's uh yeah, I think this is also uh another place where it's useful to read biography into uh the experience of uh or into one's interpretation of uh the later works. I think that's definitely correct or or very likely correct I should say as a non-expert nonplato scholar and uh well it's just a very interesting episode of history. We should maybe even cover this in a later detail in another episode, but this idea of Plato attempting to um reform get Dionis II interested in philosophy especially understood as this practice of you know cultivating oneself remember it's this ambitious project perfecting oneself really and doing so with his friend Dion on and ultimately of failing but also there's all this polit all these political dynamics where you know there's Dion is banished and Dian Isis II not without justification so I think fears rebellion from Dion and then even there's Dion himself eventually does overthrow Dianisis I then is assassinated by another pupil of Plato which I think is also perhaps I think another way in which Plato must have thought he he failed if you know his his pupils when it went against each other just like like so but uh you know I mean what a you have philosophy trying to convert the the tyrant into philosopher and then also this these sort of palace intrigues and such so I think it's probably worth covering in more detail. >> Yeah, we could do a play playbyplay. It's like, where's my HBO miniseries? That's what I want to know. I need idealism tempered, >> a Plato story. >> Good episode title, perhaps. >> Um, I just I don't know if you're like I I just think of I just don't think of philosophers as the kind of people who like are teaching pupils and have their pupils, you know, engaging in these philosophical or in these political intrigue and they're like, "No, don't do or they're like really upset by it. I mean, yeah, I just think of this. This was helpful for me to ground Plato as a person because I think of him just kind of like existing outside of time because he's so prolific in his writing and his thinking. Um, and yeah, I don't think this I don't think this episode gets enough attention. Um, for all the reasons you stated, it's it's it's really fascinating. We will we will do a longer episode on it. Um, I think Waterfield, we actually have this one in pretty good detail because Plato writes about it in his letters. And so we we you get these non-filosophical writings of Plato, which I hadn't read before, basically describing what's going on in his life, what what has what has occurred in these um in this time in in in Syracuse. It's a very very historically interesting episode. >> Yeah, absolutely. And I think perhaps a reminder that you know philosophy is not merely theory right perhaps it's not a uh not as specialized or I know there are modern philosophers of course who will say this sort of thing and they aim to aim to make it not uh as as theoretical but it doesn't it's not you know isolated ivory tower and such. It's uh >> Mhm. >> at least it aspires to something more concrete, you know, political change, but perhaps this is a this is a story where, you know, that's that's just exceptionally difficult to do, exceptionally difficult to make happen. >> Yeah. I think about like when we typically criticize philosophy for being abstract, we criticize the ivory tower. We're thinking about that in something that's like inaccessible. It doesn't produce value. Plato's If philosophy has produced any value, Plato's right up there, you know, top three in terms of, you know, establishing the discipline, influencing other pe thinkers and other people later on. So he he wasn't inaccessible. It wasn't this like you know just purely intellectual exercise to get citations or to like grow your own career or like it wasn't it wasn't any of these things we might criticize modern academia for but I think as you say it aims at something larger especially the ancient Greek conception of philosophy aimed at something larger. Yeah. And he failed to make that I mean still was making this jump in one extent. He was in court. He was influencing people. He was existing outside of the ivory tower. But I guess I guess the way that I want to frame this is like is that project even possible? >> Do we have an do we have an example of that project even being successfully done? Like is there is there the sophist reforming the tyrant? Does that even happen? >> It's not so much that Plato failed. It's not clear to me that Plato's failed because I don't know if anybody's actually done this. you can come into a court and like navigate the court in a kind of Machavellian real politic way, but I'm just not sure if anybody succeeded. And I would like to see that before I guess Plato's failed because maybe it's just not possible. Yeah, you can almost have I think there's that question about whether you reform a tyrant, whether that's possible and perhaps even the broader question about the role of politics in a philosopher's life. And you can almost read this story in two ways. You know, Plato was, you know, not just the man of theory but also the man of practice and aimed to, you know, dive into political court when, you know, doing so was rational and he thought he could, you know, have a possible impact and at least it was good for, you know, relationships with Dion and so on. I think that's a that's another factor. And but you could also read this in you know almost an as a story about what happens what goes wrong when the philosopher tries to enter political life and you know have almost a more monastic argument which is that you know philosophy ought to be focused on describing the world accurately and this is a sort of a warning of what happens when you know philosophers bumble their way into court phil uh politics >> you know and wouldn't the world be better place if Plato had written another dialogue or two instead of >> you know going over Syracuse or something like this. So >> yeah, kind of like stay in your lane. >> But yeah, Plato's Plato's has value to add. It's not this. And yeah, you could have written you could have written some more instead of spending some years of your later life doing this. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Um >> I'm not sure if that's right, but I think there's at least those two. >> It is a sad reading, but it is something to it. Anything else to add or any last thoughts on um Waterfield's book? >> No, that's that's all. I mean, it's a bit daunting. It's very daunting to write a biography on Plato and also a a challenge to review a biography of of Plato just because he is such a important figure to uh philosophy and uh you know the western western culture and such. So, um, and I think anyone who who wants to get a little bit more background on Athenian society broadly, Plato in particular, uh, after poking around some of his dialogues would be well served to to look at Waterfield's book. >> One thing, one last word I'll say on it. I mean, it makes me think about this kind of I think it's I think it's a great way to have this combination of somebody who's so wellversed in the philosophy. Like Waterfield does know what he's talking about. I I'm not a Plato expert, but I know enough Plato to say like he he does know what he's talking about philosophically. And so to combine that with the the biographical aspects was really valuable. And then it was very readable. like it was not it it's it's very readable, not overly complicated or obscure or complex where it doesn't need to be, which is much appreciated. It's the kind of thing it's actually a really easy read for the subject matter. So, yeah, really enjoyed it and got what I wanted out of it, which is to like understand Plato, I think, better as a person and have a bit of a better sense of what directed his thinking. Again, that dynamic of just to just to close the loop on that tyranny versus democracy, both fail. How can we do it better? Well, we can do it through this philosopher king model. But what value is that if it's not practical? and then this later period where he tries to make it practical and tries to explore the possibility of doing that which is a compelling way not the only way to read Plato and think about Plato but a a compelling way to think about some of the ideas that unify his work. >> Awesome. Thanks, Michael. >> Thanks, Gil.
