---
title: "Therapy vs Philosophy (Episode 191)"
slug: therapy-vs-philosophy
episode_number: 191
youtube_id: 6bZyuRTCd30
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6bZyuRTCd30
upload_date: 2025-07-08
duration: 54:31
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Michael Tromblé and I am Kale Bontos. And today we're going to be talking about stoicism versus therapy, coaching, the role that philosophy, particularly stoic philosophy, has in developing mental health and responding to challenging situations as opposed to those maybe more popular, more traditional types of treatments or methods, something like a more traditional approach to therapy or coaching. In other words, you know, you're at a crossroads, you're encountering some issue. Why would you turn to philosophy? What is philosophy particularly good at? And stoicism as that philosophy versus something like why would you go to therapy or why would you seek out coaching? What are the strengths there? What are the weaknesses? Um, this is uh something that I think I've prepared some notes for this. Caleb, you disagree with some of my views. So, we'll have a little bit of a debate here, which will be fun. Yeah. Yeah. And I'm going to be focusing on traditional western talk therapy. That's something that I have a bit of exposure in. I'm not an expert at that by any means. You if you listen to this podcast, you know, we I would say I'm an expert in stoicism and, you know, have a background in philosophy, but not an expert in therapy. So really kind of how I view those the roles that they play or the differences that they have. Um, but my background is definitely in the philosophy side of things. So, it's it's really just an attempt to make sense of what I've been chewing on for a while, which is, you know, you're a person with a problem and where should you go to solve that problem and and what kind of benefits do each of these dis different systems have? Any context you want to add before we jump into it? I think it's a it's a good topic because philosophy and therapy are related and I suppose I mean if you encounter some adverse life event or experiencing anxiety or uh sense of meaningless whatever it is I sort of thing that can bring people to stoicism or it can bring cause people to explore therapy as it were or perhaps uh get a coach depending on the the nature of the issue. So, and I think there's and then there's that that question of course is one path more advisable than another and what sorts of circumstances I think you know that's uh to t tackle those sorts of questions it's it's useful to distinguish what the role of philosophy is uh how philosophy and therapy are distinct and um yeah just just think through where uh one might be better than the other so it's a good topic certainly yeah especially because thinking about sometimes they talk about why there's not a lot of women in philosophy and one of the answers I get or non stoic phil why why there's more interest in modern stoicism for men other than women one of the answers I get asking people about that as well women kind of have this pathway to therapy or this pathway maybe to talking about these things with their friends and there's kind of so there there's this view that you know both men and women just as an example are trying to solve a similar problem and you're saying these are related but different things and then one group goes one way one group goes the other way, you know, should more men be doing, you know, therapy instead of learning about stoicism and should more women be learning about philosophy and vice versa and and that applies, I guess, in just different context. And so, I just thought, you know, do the thing a philosopher does. Let's define them. Let's put them in let's parse them out. Let's understand how they're conceptually distinct and talk about that. Um before we get into it, I did want to say that you know modern western talk therapy or or modern kind of coaching traditions or anything like that those are relatively recent um that you know that wouldn't have had existed in the same form obviously in the time of Epictitus or Marcus Aurelius and so the Stoics did at their time view their project at least metaphorically as being medical right so you wouldn't today you wouldn't go to a hospital and be referred to a philosopher, be referred to a psychologist or psychiatrist. But the Stoics viewed their project as being a medical project. It's one in pursuit of health and well-being. In Epictitus' Discourses, book three, chapter 24, Epictitus says, "The philosopher's lecture room is a hospital. You ought not to walk out of it in a state of pleasure, but in pain, for you are not in good condition when you arrive." you would say, well, this is a bit of a metaphor about how, you know, it's going to be painful before you get better. But Chrysopus, um, third leader of the Stoic school, he also makes the same metaphor. He says, quote, just as the doctor must have intimate knowledge of the illnesses of the body, so also the doctor of the mind must have intimate knowledge of a variety of conditions of the mind. So, Chrysopus is calling, you know, what do you think about when you think about a psychologist? you think about them almost as a doctor of the mind. Uh Christmas is calling the stoic the doctor of the mind. And as you pointed out Caleb, there's also these analogies uh where we call passions or extreme emotions as diseases of the soul. We talk about people that are um vicious. You know, they're they're not good people as being in a kind of madness, a madness that needs curing. So there's all this I would see, you know, it would be interested if you if you dropped Epictitus in today, if you dropped Epictitus or Senica in today's world, they'd probably think, well, what a psychologist is doing is quite quite a lot of overlap to what a um what a what a philosopher is doing in terms of having this pursuit of of making people healthy, viewing themselves as being doctors of the soul or the mind, and viewing themselves as helping people alleviate the illnesses of the mind or remove their mad madness so to speak. Mhm. Um yeah, anything to add to that? Yeah, and you can see that analogy continuing today. There's uh Martha Nusbomb, the classicist and philosopher, one of her books is entitled the the therapy of desire. It's a book that's all about the hellistic philosophies as philosophies as way of ways of life. Um and the ancient philosophers were certainly mindful of you know attempting to cure these passions as it were if that wasn't the primary goal of some of these philosophies. It certainly was one of the selling points if you will or something that emerges as a as a side effect or perhaps a stepping stone into that particular school. So of I think then there's that that question just how tight of the metaphor is it really? You know, in some sense, of course, philosophy isn't medical. You know, brings to mind that that meme about someone who's fallen or something. They say, "I need help. I need a doctor." And, you know, the some other person blankly stares back, you know, I've got you. I've got, you know, I studied philosophy. I've got a PhD in philosophy. Right? That's not not the same sort of thing uh for an acute medical emergency. Uh so of course they're distinct in some ways but in other ways you know what the hellistic philosophers were up to was uh I think there's a real sense in which they were psychologists. Yeah. And so just that's the kind of argument for why there's a there's a this overlap and then we're trying to pull apart what the differences might be. So like we agree that you know philosophy it's it's a it's a treatment of sorts. as you said, it's not, you know, it's not something I want if I break my leg, but it's a treatment of sorts. Um, so the question is kind of what kind and how is that different than other kinds of treatment. So I have three main arguments. We'll structure the episode kind of going going through these arguments one by one. First one is that philosophy, therapy, and life coaching aim at different goals. That's one of the fundamental differences. They just they they target different things. They have a different aim. Um, second claim is that stoicism is best when it's transformative and preventative. And I'll get into what that means, but I'm going to argue that I think stoicism really is good for making you into a more robust kind of person. And then my third claim is that stoicism is actually bad or comparatively worse for dealing with acute trauma or dealing with PE or dealing in situations where things have gotten quite bad for resolving the temporary madness that you know the Stoics would say you fall into this madness when you know something really terrible's happened you're in a bad way. It's not actually that good at that. It's more for the person who has time to be reflective comparatively to something like therapy. It's it's it's more for the person who who has time to be reflective uh and transformative, but we'll go through those one by one. I know Kell, if you disagree with some of those, you might push back and so we'll have a we'll have a nice debate. Cool. So, number one, stoicism and therapy aim at different goals. I mean, that's probably non-controversial until I say until I get into what they are. Um, so I was doing some reading on this and kind of thinking about, you know, what is what is therapy um versus, you know, how I treat philosophy. And I my my what I'll propose is that therapy focuses on the past and present. So it's backwards looking. And it's also not prescriptive. So it doesn't it doesn't say, you know, this is the way you should be or this is the way you need to be. It helps you understand your own thought patterns and feelings so that you can understand how they're affecting your life. And it provides you with a set of tools to support your mental health like mindfulness. But it really is this this um act of kind of non-judgmental discovery. If you think of the therapist paradigm of um you know I'm I'm really angry about this. Well, why? Well, because of this reason. Well, why? And you kind of you're using that to understand the root of your anger. And then through doing that there's there's likely some sort of um alleviation of distress or a degree of clarity that's gained but um it's not being prescriptive in that process. It's not I feel angry well you shouldn't feel angry. It's more let's get to the root of that or understand really how your behavior your patterns or your your past experiences are affecting your current happiness and situation. Then if I think of something like life coaching, how does that differ from therapy? Well, life coaching then focuses on the present and the future, but it's also not prescriptive. So you come in with a goal and your coach works with you to understand the best means of achieving that goal. So philos philosophy I think in a different category because it transcends this I I've tried to make this argument therapy is is is looking to the past, coaching is looking to the future. I think philosophy transcends this division because it's a prescriptive account of how to live with both therapeutic and coaching aspects. So it's it's a bit less task oriented than therapy, but it wants you to understand your thought patterns and your feelings. It's a bit less pastoriented because I think there's like a bit less of a emphasis on just like self-discovery. We you don't hear a lot in stoicism about like you know what happened to you as a child. Let's go through your formative memories. But that we do understand why you think and what you think it. It's a bit less future oriented than coaching because they're not just going to take for granted, oh, that's your goal. That's fine. Let's run with it. Um, but it does want to help people navigate acutely frustrating situations. Um, but but it it provides this um yeah, it provides this prescriptive account of life that combines the both the past and the future aspects. Um, I've got some examples of where I think Epictitus does some coaching or um, and jumps into that, but anything you want to add to that distinction before I get into that? Well, maybe your examples will help. Yeah, tease us out, but I'm curious about the uh, past, present, future type framing. So, let me jump into this example with Epictitus. So there's this example in Epictitus Discourses 1.11 where a father runs away from a sick daughter. I've talked about this example a lot because I think it's such a great passage because he's just like I just my daughter was dying. I was freaking out. I didn't know what to do and I ran away. And Epictitus talks to talks to the guy. Um and Epictitus helps him understand his feelings in the situation. He's basically saying, you know, you you you claim you want to be a good father. you claim you love your daughter, but these are like not really ways of achieving those rules and that's not really, you know, you you've got this kind of inappropriate fear of death and not understanding that, you know, you should have you should have accounted for that when you when you love a mortal thing. Um, so Epictitus is like he's working with the guy to help him understand his feelings, you know, like why are you afraid? Well, I'm afraid of her dying, but like um you know, is that something you should be feeling? Does that make sense in this situation when you knew you took it on as a father? And so that's a kind of therapy, but then it it's also prescriptive. He's like, "This is not the right way to be. You're failing to live up to the natural rule of being a father." And then I think the he he also then kind of coaches um maybe not in that passage, but in other passages, the stoic coaches you is prescriptive about what goals are and are not worth having and will make fun of you and mock you if you have a bad goal. You know, if you want to become rich and famous, they that's the stupidest thing. But if you have a good goal, like you want to be a philosopher, well then he's going to coach you on how to achieve that. Well, you should study these books. You should read these dialogues. You should, you know, put put into practice what you say. Um, so it incorporates those therapy and coaching aspects stoicism does, but it differs in in these main ways. So it it offers a conception of the good life, which is what makes it prescriptive. There's better and worse ways to live. And um while it incorporates the backwards focus of therapy and then the f future focus of coaching, it doesn't do either of these as purely because it's prescriptive. It's like you can't have a non-judgmental environment of understanding your belief when you're with a stoic because there are constantly judgments. Some beliefs are good and some beliefs are bad. Some beliefs are worth having. Some are true and some are false. So it's not just like I just want to understand what you're thinking. It's like, "No, I want to understand what you're thinking so I can correct it because you've got a lot wrong going on." And then you also can't have non-judgmental support of your goals because some goals are bad. Some goals aren't worth pursuing and others are. So, I guess the first argument there is that like, yeah, to to to resum that I'm framing therapy and coaching as being not prescriptive. Therapy and coaching is present and past oriented. Coaching is future oriented. Stoicism dives into both, but its main distinction is it offers like a really robust conception of the good life. So, yeah, you need to understand your past, you need to understand your future, but we're not doing that in a non-judgmental environment. Um, yeah, what do you think about that? Yeah, I think that's useful. I think that first point you hit on is absolutely correct. this idea that if you're investigating, you know, if you're doing philosophy, especially if you're thinking about a particular school, that school is going to have a view on what it is to live a good life and it's not going to be uh shy about promoting that at all. Whereas many therapeutic frameworks are meant to work with you know a range of different worldviews and not necessarily then don't necess don't conflict with those worldviews at all. So if you take a given system like cognitive behavioral therapy or acceptance commitment therapy, it'll promote something like living in accordance with your values but not say that much about what your values should be. And and now there are some ideas about what perhaps what your values should be. They're certainly not going to be as opinionated and they'll probably broadly fit in with uh what you could say, you know, a western liberal type framework about the kinds of lives, you know, one could have. And they uh certainly aren't going to be as opinionated about the the Stoics on that matter. Most I think therapists, therapeutic modalities won't be as opinionated. So, I think I think that point is uh absolutely correct. Anything else? I mean, I agree with you. I think um I agree with you agreeing with me. Um maybe there's Oh, go ahead. Maybe another way to think about the whether philosophy focuses more on the past or future or not the sort of temporal aspect is how important is nonjudgmental inquiry into the practice and uh in particular inquiry about yourself, who you are, your experiences and so on. And I think that's certainly important for philosophy, but perhaps there is less emphasis on it because, you know, you're just at the very beginning, you're thinking about, you know, what is, you know, really these big questions. What does a good life look like? And then how can I get there? And perhaps that's when these questions about, you know, the nature of you come into come into play. Another difference that's related to this is we're mostly talking about or the frameworks or philosophies if you will, some of the background assumptions to philosophical practice, therapeutic practice. But if many ways of doing therapy involve another person and there's sort of this institutional fact that you are you interacting with a therapist and there's a relationship there. Not necessarily. You can also say practice a given modality through an app just as you can practice a philosophy through an app. Use that as a tool. But um the uh I think you know because of that the there's some amount of getting to know who you are, what your goals are and you know anyone who's done therapy is familiar with this process of uh sharing you sharing facts about you both for the sake of self-discovery but also to guide your therapist uh in a way so that they can help guide you would be the theory. Um, so, uh, per, you know, I think we're maybe we're focused more about general frameworks, but perhaps this the fact that you are often doing therapy with another person does does influence, uh, influence the philosophy of therapy as it as it were. Yeah. I mean, the reason I want the reason I wanted to focus on the framework was because I mean, for me, the question is like which of these should I do and why? Mhm. you know, and then and then your point is there's these different modalities. I don't know honestly if if I could, you know, if if Epictetus was around, I mean, I'm sure there is philosophy coaching and and you see that available. If Epictitus is around, I would love to go and talk with Epictitus. So maybe that modality is more like maybe there's something weird about philosophy where you know because I can read Plato. Um I want to go and I want to go and read Plato instead of I mean like what I'm just thinking now is well why is there not more why is there not more philosophical coaches? Why is that not a more popular approach? Should that be a more popular approach? Maybe it should be, but if not, maybe a reason why not is because to to satisfy that prescriptive aspect, how should I live? I can go and read some of the smartest people that have ever lived. Like it doesn't all have to be tailored because parts of it can be universal. And maybe that's what makes that uh that kind of solo aspect of it a little bit more viable. Mhm. Yeah, I think um that's a good I think that's a good point and I think it is a relevant point that there are philosophical coaches and I suppose brings I suppose there is this issue what's the difference between coaching and therapy and at least in the states coaching is much less regulated which means you can have coaches of all kinds life coaches of all kinds and you can't have a stoic life coach or you could have someone focusing on maybe more mystical type practices or someone who just focuses on your career and that sort of thing. So I I think coaching perhaps does give a little bit more of a you know there are more possibilities there whereas a therapy not always but it's at least a hybrid medical type approach where you know there's this idea that in order to be a therapist you need to be certified and there's a link to medical institutions. Um but it's not just of course a medical uh institution. It's perhaps a little bit softer science as it were, you know. Um and and you know, so that that distinguishes it from coaching and philosophy as well. Yeah. It just it has a tighter relationship to our medical system and kind of the structure in which you can access it is very different. Right. So with that framework in place and maybe that's not the I think that the framework could probably get a bit tighter. I think it gives us it gives us a starting point. We we're on the same page. But look, the prescriptive nature and the unshy the lack of pluralism, you know, I'm a stoic, this is the right way to live. I'm an epicurian. I'm a, you know, a cynic. This is the right way to live. That is that is a fundamental difference. And then the they're aiming at wellness. They do it a bit differently. I've tried to argue forward-looking versus backwards looking and both a little bit more non-judgmental. Like I think the therapy and coaching are both going to be critical of things that are not internally consistent. You know, you say you want a good relationship with your partner, but you keep doing these things to sabotage your relationship. You know, you you claim to me you want to get a promotion at work, but we've we've talked through these steps and you're not taking these steps. So, like I think therapy and and coaching are going to be critical of something that isn't internally consistent, but with the exception, as you said, of like, you know, I've got I've got ideations of murdering somebody, you know, unless you're going in and saying that I have ideations of harming somebody else. Um, people are going to be uh fairly non-judgmental about, you know, let's just kind of figure out where you are and if it's not working for what you want, that's an issue. But if it is working for you want and it's not hurting anybody, that's fine. Um, so but then this other question I have is like, okay, we're all people. We're all trying to live good lives. Why should I turn to philosophy versus um therapy or coaching or something something alternative? And so my second argument is that stoicism I think is is at its best or is the thing that we should do and philosophy is the thing you should do when maybe you're not in a moment of crisis. you're in a position where you have the time and the energy to engage in self transformation and build up a kind of resiliency um or strength. So I I stole this from Dorian on Reddit. Well, inspired by one of one of his comments, so shout out there. Um he he was saying, you know, if we think of our minds like a body, stoism is more like strength training than physiootherapy. And I thought that was a really compelling metaphor. You go to the gym, you strength train, you build up muscle, and then you can go and you can use that muscle to do things you couldn't do before. You you become a stronger person. But that's not the same. I don't necessarily go to the gym for for weightlifting if I've torn my pec muscle. You if I go and I do that, I might just kind of aggravate aggravate the issue. So I my argument is it's it's best used to transform your base level, not rehabilitate you in a moment of suffering. So you know this is a messy metaphor and people use strength training when they're recovering from injuries. But um I I I I do come back to the idea it's to prepare yourself for adversity and transform yourself into the person that can perform the pursue the stoic idea of the good life. So you use exercises like momento mori premeditatu mealorum to build resilience and then you read philosophy practice virtue gain a better self- understanding to transform yourself towards the stoic view of the good life um I think of the James Stockdale example um so he was the just for those that are maybe not familiar with James Stockdale he was a member of the very fair fairly senior member of the United States military shot down over Vietnam was was prisoner of war for seven or eight years and but he also had a masters of philosophy and read epictitus quite thoroughly and he used stoic philosophy to emotionally survive that experience and I think of that it's like there's a person in a downtime who used philosophy to transform himself and prove himself and then when the challenge came he was able to face the challenge so that for me is where philosophy and stoicism is at its comparative best there's not an acute crisis you're able to just transform yourself like the person who's able to build muscle through weight training and then when the moment comes they're able to actually lift the weight because they they've spent the time putting in the practice. What do you what do you think of that? Yeah. Well, I think I agree that it would be better if you're able to transform yourself through philosophical practice such that you can weather adverse events and the storms of life and uh you know that's a better place to be in than you know being at sea when the storm comes and being unprepared and such. But it is true that many people discover stoicism after a setback. Whether it's a breakup, a serious injury, becoming fired, you know, losing a loved one, whatever it is, that's how many people discover stoism. And they do find it useful for working through their obstacle, uh, working through their grief. And um perhaps in some sense it would be better if they had discovered stoicism earlier and that's what many people come to believe. But that doesn't mean it's not useful for uh managing you know managing these stressful and tragic type situations which I understand you're not saying it's not useful but I would I would just say it still can be you know exceptionally useful exceptionally powerful. So I wouldn't underrate that. Well let me get to the next part. I mean, my claim, I'm trying to make some sort of claim here, is that it's probably wor I think worse than at least, if not maybe overrated. I mean, I'm interested in and in and what other people feel about this about dealing with acute trauma. That's my that's my third claim. This is where therapy comes in. Yeah. But I guess we want to draw maybe I'll I'll argue for that. But I think the nuance here is that I think maybe I'm arguing that it's like a bad thing to do. It's clearly very helpful if you've been studying it beforehand. And it's clearly very helpful if you turn to it for the right reasons at the right time. And maybe I would I would change my argument to be something like it's bad if you're looking for it like a short-term remedy. you know, if you're looking to just apply it, um, you know, I'm I'm really hurting. I'll look for anything that makes me hurt less. Maybe I can use stoicism to help me hurt less. Um, I I I don't want to judge people that have come to stoicism that in that case. I'm not saying that's the wrong reason to approach it. You've got a problem and you're looking for a solution and that's that's right. Perhaps there's there is a perhaps something that you're uh touch on and that we we've touched on before is perhaps not so much as preventative aspect but the transformative aspect of philosophy. Pierado al talks about it as a conversion and that's I guess that's that idea that if you take it seriously as a way of life you know even if you come to the philosophy after a setback you realize what it's about isn't just about overcoming setbacks or something like that. So there is that related idea that doesn't touch on as much as the preventative type point which maybe gets into into this third claim where perhaps uh um you know your views uh there are means that are more effective for acute trauma pain and such but uh I think there is sort of a there certainly is that I don't know if I want to say deeper philosophical point but there is that idea that if you take it seriously as a philosopher of life. It's about life as a whole, not just preventing pains, overcoming obstacles and so on. Yeah, this is the I think this is the right answer. That was like kind of the missing piece of the puzzle. Thanks, Kil. is that um you know if you approach it as a holistic transformative philosophy of life then you know the fact that that a you know a loved one dying some sort of significant change some sort of painful breakup turns you to philosophy well then that's a great thing I'm not saying don't go to philosophy as a transformative you know way of improving your life because you know you've got to be things have got to be okay before you're allowed to do that no no if that turns you and you're approaching it for the right reasons, that's a great thing. Something I'm really positive on. Um I think I think what I'm criticizing or I think what stoism fails to do is it fails to act like a it's not actually a very good anesthetic. It's not actually a very good mechanism of like I'm hurting and I want to not hurt short term or I want to kind of get my emotions under control. So this is the way that I've I've framed it here. I said it's actually pretty bad at dealing with issues beyond your current level of progress. If we view it just as a means by which to deal with those issues. Um, so if I, you know, if I'm encountering grief that I'm not able to deal with yet, then I I I think that sometimes, you know, philosophy might not, especially if you're already wellversed in stoicism, if it's beyond your current level of progress, it might not be able to might not be the right thing to turn to exclusively in that moment. I think in that moment, this is where therapy or medical intervention or kind of more traditional intervention can can help. And I think if you look at the the short-term therapeutic strategies in stoicism for moments of extreme grief, moments when the stoics would say, you know, you're in the kind of throngs of madness, you're not acting rationally, you're really, you know, you're overcome by a passion. You know, they're not they're not that compelling, I think. Um things like try to convince the you know the advice they give to stoics to people in these kind of moments of of of extreme kind of concern or anxiety or grief is you try to convince the person that grief is not appropriate. You try to wait and ride out the extreme wave of emotion so you can reason later. Try to reprimand excessive grief. You try to sympathize with them but you don't empathize with the person grieving. Um, and I think all of those are just like they're not that great strategies if we're just if we're just thinking about just the issue of like I'm really sad, I'm really angry, I'm really anxious and I need a I need a response or a solution to that kind of short-term problem during a crisis in my life so that things don't continue to spiral down. I think the stoicism, the stoic tries to make you strong enough that you don't enter a passionate state or that's what stoicism does. but it isn't the best at actually dealing with those intense emotions. I think therapy is better here. Um, then when the emotion has subsided or you've started to heal, you can use stoicism to reconceptualize the situation. You can use it to change the way you think about the situation, provide it with more meaning, with more nuance and um, philosophy can change your perception of death or loss or failure. But in terms of I think that really acute passionate state probably therapy therapy is a better mechanism. So I' I've nuanced my argument a bit but that's that's that's what I'm that's what I'm arguing here. What do you think? Yeah. Well let's see. I think there so there's sort of two points here. One is about the comparative value of the stoic framework versus the therapeutic one. And then another is about sort of searching for a solution when dealing with an acute trauma. So an acute trauma can be a range of different things of course, but if you're thinking about it can be anywhere from serious anxiety to uh the pain at losing a loved one to perhaps something that you know you have an acute trauma that sets off a schizophrenic response or something like this which is certainly more extreme and perhaps you know stoics don't have too much to say about schizophrenia. So maybe that's an easy win for the therapeutic side, but I I think when you're think what you're talking about isn't so much that, but some of these, you know, these more extreme events of ordinary life, right? Yeah. I mean, let me give you an example to make it more mean I would say extreme events of ordinary life. I would also say James Stockdale in his book, he gets shot down in this prisoner of war camp. He's applying stoicism. He has this chapter where he says, "I tried to tell it to somebody else. I tried. I was like, "Hey, you should start using the stoic philosophy or you should think like this." And the guy was basically like, "Hey, screw off, man." Like, uh, I don't want to hear any of that. And I think that's kind of that I mean, people also have that response to therapy, I guess. But is that kind of that mo I guess it's this view of when you're in that fight orflight response, when you're in that like I just need to survive kind of moment. Um, actually attacking philosophy as a holistic view of life, as a transformative project is probably pretty difficult, probably above your capacity if you really are in that fight orflight mode and more something that kind of gets you gets helps you regulate, gets you back into like a more secure position sooner is probably more helpful and I I think that therapy is does a better job of doing that. Yeah. Well, I suppose this connects to so there's a comparative point and then maybe there's a there's this other point about searching for a solution to an event like this. And I mean I don't think therapy is very good at addressing the, you know, what it is to be a prisoner of war or what it is to, you know, experience a loved one dying. And I wouldn't suggest turning necessarily turning to therapy in either of those events. I mean think those are just terrible experiences right that you're going to encounter and there's just going to be some amount of pain suffering that any ordinary human is going to experience in those circumstances. So I suppose I would push back at this search for solution to begin with. You know, you have like you know, life is just tragic. And I think there is something misplaced in just trying to come to stoicism as a solution that's going to get rid of, you know, your acute pain at the moment when you're not at the right skill level. You haven't done the preventative work and you're just suffering. You know, you're just sort of reaching out for what's off the shelf because something terrible has happened. But I think you know therapy is just that another often just another thing on the shelf that someone's reaching to when really you know these extreme grief uh is totally normal that maybe the prison of wars example isn't super useful for most of us but uh you know some feelings of depression after being fired and unemployed and struggling with feeling like nothing's going right in your life. If you're trying to search for a new job, you know, that's that's uh in a way, you know, perhaps a very useful stoic teaching here is that you're trying to focus on what you can control and those sorts of natural impulses are out of your control. And that's I think that's a useful frame for people and there are other useful framings that come to that insight as well. But but I would I would push back on this point that you know there doesn't always sometimes it's just you know uh these these are ordinary life events. You don't necessarily need to go to a therapist or perhaps even a philosophy to to make sense of them. I mean I think that's a really interesting perspective. You're saying basically this is the wrong way of thinking about if it's like what what what what can I pull off the shelf to solve this issue? you kind of you're asking the wrong question to start with and you know you're not going to be happy anyway you land. Um I think it kind of I mean you're committed to the idea that it breaks apart the medical analogy then right because yeah you're going to break some bones sometimes. Yeah, you're going to you know get a cold or a flu but there's still medicine we can take. There's still kind of ways of helping that. So, are you saying that there's just like kind of tragedies that we we shouldn't be approaching in this way? Um, is that is that Yeah. Is that what you're saying? Yeah. I think it's it's a little closer. The medicine example is useful because it's it's um I think what I'm sort of saying is that by going to therapy, you're like overmedicalizing, which is an issue. You know if you have uh some uh it might be bronchitis or pneumonia where people used to you know offer many different treatments to lower the amount of coughing that occurs to this but this is but this is not useful at treating the root cause and I think there's you know this general idea that you can overmedicalize something sometimes going for a solution right off the shelf isn't as good as waiting it out or perhaps some other other solution. And so I think that that's closer to what I'm saying is that by you know reaching for a quick solution off the shelf you're sort of assuming that and ignoring you know the reality this is an ordinary life event and there are you know there there are risks to therapy there are risks to a variety of different medical treatments so you're just exposing yourself to to those um I mean I think there's something compelling telling there about I mean I guess the kind of meta judgment of what I'm feeling is not appropriate and so I've got to do something about it in the short term but you're but you're judging that just because it feels bad. um not because you believe stoicism and so you have a reason for thinking it's not appropriate or some sort of like consistent foundational belief. You're just like I just I just don't want to feel this way. And so you're kind of medicalizing something that is a normal way to feel either just just is a normal way to feel or is certainly normal with the kind of you know the way you view life at the at the time. I guess to push back here when do you so if if you're undermining this when when in your view what's your view on when should someone turn to philosophy versus turn to therapy you know stoicism has this transformative component it has this resilience component and it's at least on par with you know dealing with an acute issue or maybe we shouldn't be trying to like you know pull anything off the shelf to deal with the acute issue. when is your view you giving somebody advice when would you when would you recommend therapy or coaching instead of philosophy? Yeah, it is really hard to say. um at a first pass um or maybe one way to put this there's sort of um a selection type effect that occurs perhaps with therapy with um philosophy where if you know a little bit about stoicism and or someone knows a little bit about stoicism they genuinely felt it's it spoke to them then maybe I would think it would be useful to share more about stoicism for that per to that person maybe that that would be a useful thing to do. Whereas other people who don't, you know, have never heard about stoicism are not in any way interested in the stoic aesthetic. I would say Greece, Rome doesn't speak to them. They hated gladiator. You know, that's not quite it. But there's a kind of person who I think that you know, you just the stoicism is a logical, analytical, philosophical system. And some people just don't think like that. and they might benefit more from a you know a relationship with a therapist in front of them or perhaps you know the language of compassion inspires them in a way that the language of virtue doesn't. So something like compassion focused therapy might be a better uh better route for them to take. So perhaps that's a little bit of a dodge, but I think I do think it depends on the person and I I don't agree that with the general view that if you're having an in, you know, in a serious issue, then you should go to therapy. I think, you know, it just it depends on who you are. I think that's something I I would push back against. I guess I also just want to say that I'm not committed to that view either that you should, you know, if you're having a hard time, you should go to therapy is not something I'm committed to. I'm more committed to someone having a hard time and asking for help. Yeah. And then what what what advice do you give? And I'm still I'm still not sure I would give I would tell that person to read Epic Tetus instead of going to see a professional and probably for the reasons you raised which is that Epic Tetus is going to maybe be the right answer. Marcus Aurelius or you know your stoic of choice is going to be the right answer for a certain person. Like maybe it's this thing where therapy because it's amorphous and it's non-prescriptive and it's relational so it's a bit more subjective. Maybe because of that it's you're more likely to get a five out of 10 experience more broadly. Whereas stoicism is the kind of thing where person thinks well this is a bunch of garbage. Uh or they think well this is lifechanging. I'm like I'm really trying to think of that example. Somebody's like, you know, Caleb, I'm having a really hard time. What do I do? Versus somebody saying like I think if somebody said, I don't know how to live, kind of confused, kind of feel like I don't have meaning. I kind of feel like amorphice. I would say you should like, yeah, you should learn about some philosophy as a way of life. Still going to be some people that it doesn't do that doesn't do it for them, but that's the advice I would give them. But if somebody came to me, yeah, and they said I I'm having a really hard time, I probably wouldn't. And that's is I think that's my attempt to try to explain why. Do you feel the same way or do you think you know can't we can't answer that holistically? It's case by case. What do you think? Yeah, it's a tricky it is a it's a tricky issue. I wonder I think um I I do sort of think it depends on the details. I just uh so you know hundreds of years ago the typical person if they didn't have a specific intervention in mind they might say you know go to the priest or you know see that member you know in find in our community who's who's very good at dealing with these these sorts of issues whatever it is and I think the therapist has basically just taken the place of the role of the priest and it's just some third party to you know shovel people off to would you know, this a strong way to put it and as opposed to thinking through, you know, what exactly is this person facing? You know, I I I think um you know, if they're depressed because they haven't found a job and for 6 months, then I think, you know, that's uh then, you know, what I can offer there is perhaps more solutionoriented. I think the problem really is that, you know, they don't have a job. They've lost a sense of community per perhaps they feel like they don't have the purpose they once had. And to, you know, and any way I can I can help with that, that that might be um that would be that could be a useful thing, whether that's trying to provide a sense of community or help them find a job. If it's a different circumstance, you know, you haven't found work for years or something like this and you're struggling with depression, people around you, you know, socially isolating, then I mean, and you know, maybe that person hasn't tried therapy at all, then that might be a place where look, this is something you can try would be an appropriate thing. If they're anyway interested in philosophy, then I would suggest philosophical works. But otherwise, you know, I don't recommend philosophy to people too often unless it's uh something I feel like they would uh they would gel with unless it was, you know, people have people like to consume all sorts of media. So perhaps there's something closer to who they are that might speak to them. Well, to shoehorn that, I'm trying really hard to stick to my framework, Caleb, and you trying to break it apart. I mean, the example of the person, you know, I'm unhappy because I've been unable to find a job for six months. That for me is a coaching issue. At least in the way I framed it, right? It's like, okay, I'm going to help that not by having you talk about why you think you need a job to prop up your self-worth and the childhood experience that caused that. I'm going to help you find a job. Here's like some strategies for networking or, you know, developing your resume or things like this. Right? That's a coaching question. Um, and then we've got this kind of almost something I'm taking from this conversation is like, well, maybe therapy has this kind of relationship aspect for a reason. It serves this kind of communal role, this discussionbased role, you know, it was previously done, previously achieved by Christianity, uh, religion and more predominantly relationship with priest or something like this. Um and then maybe you've got this third bucket which is kind of like meaning purpose in life and again that was probably also achieved by religion um more often. Um and then I think your what I was thinking your point was like yeah sure it can be philosophy but I don't recommend it for many people because that's such a personal thing that like if it's if it doesn't hit it's not going to hit. And maybe for them that's like reading books or listening to music or watching art or engaging with other kinds of art. Like there's there's lots of things that people can consume to find meaning or purpose or you know a sense of something greater and philosophy can be one of those but it's not something you know you know because when push them stuff you're right like I don't go I don't go about recommending philosophy to to my friends and family maybe holistically but certainly not stoicism because it's almost so personal right and maybe I say like hey you should kind of read some philosophy it's interesting but I would never say like you got to read stoicism we all try that once or twice and it doesn't go as well as we expected to. Um, yeah. Um, but one thing I I I do also want to say is that sometimes that does mean using some of the stoic techniques, uh, even ones you labeled as bad ones. You know, sometimes it does work to tell someone that their grief is not appropriate or to just just, you know, just wait it out. For some people, that can be effective. For others, it's not. It's I think that probably gets to the personal nature of this and perhaps I I think that's you know not the selection of the stoic's best uh therapies for uh managing grief but uh I mean that that that can work for some people just tell telling someone to snap out of it and they you know they realize they were in a fog and then they you know get up and are back at it. But for others of course that's completely going to misfire. Yeah. This is from Margaret Graver's stoicism emotion. I think it's from Senica that it's pulled from. It might be from some Chrysipus. The list that I gave is I agree it's not the strongest list, but I think it's the kind of list that is like it's what you do for somebody else. So the list again it was like try to convince the person that the grief's not appropriate. Try to wait the and ride out the wave of emotion. Reprimand excessive grief. So like actually criticize them like stop your whining and then sympathize with but don't empathize with the person grieving. So yeah, sympathy is something that a therapist might do to some extent. And so yeah, I I I agree it's not the strongest list, but I think it's because it's it's it's restricting to the stoic techniques that you do for another person, not the stoic techniques you do for yourself. Um maybe you would add there, you know, read them some stoic philosophy or something, but like the the other ways of dealing with stoic grief are kind of self-motivated, right? like change your perspective, consider uh you know uh consider these these different ways of thinking about the situation, reframe it, but they're not things that uh the Stoics were recommending you do to other people. Yeah. Well, I suppose something people find so valuable in Stoicism is the dichotomy of control and thinking about what they can, you know, what is up to them and what isn't. And I think that's something I will if I won't explicitly mention but I will at least you know try to communicate that idea and often I think something one can't control especially when experiencing you know some extreme life event it are those negative reactions you know that's just you can expect something uh tragic to happen in your life and not not feel bad and sometimes that that can be useful reminder for people or you know especially if they're they might be prone to uh judging the fact that they have these negative reactions or somehow set an expectation for themselves that they not act like that. And I think that's not necessarily a stoic idea and that can be expressed in other ways, but I mean it can be useful. I think you're right that you can have some success presenting stoic philosophy in just common sense language. You don't need to necessarily bucket it as part of this holistic system. But just you know yeah have you know try to focus on the things that are up to you. Try to like expand your perspective. Is this going to matter to you in 5 10 years? You can kind of have these kind of these kind of exercises or question like you know did you expect nothing like this to happen? Like do you expect this to never happen? Have you thought maybe you know this is this was a necessary thing and consider how the necessity of it changes. Maybe you're not a victim. Maybe it's not um you know have you thought about how it's something other people have handled before and you've handled before. These are kind of things you can talk about in common sense ways and that is something I do. I don't think I I think I absolutely give that advice. I don't think I frame it as part of stoicism when talking to non-Stoics. Yeah. Um definitely anything any any last ideas? Well, one last idea that I think is worth mentioning especially when you're thinking about the case when someone comes and asks for help. I mean sometimes the right answer is just I don't know I don't know how to help you is sometimes the right answer especially if it's something I haven't experienced before you know I think that or you know don't have much knowledge about I think and I think that is a would fit you know perhaps with many uh philosophies in general common sense is you not to claim knowledge when one doesn't have it and uh not to claim expertise when one doesn't have it. So, I think that's that can also be a a fine response and it's certainly the appropriate one if you know if I don't if I don't know how to help at all. Yeah, we don't have to you don't you don't have to have the answer. Um, and sometimes that's as you said, it's better than pretending like you do. Certainly false confidence. Knowing you're ignorant is certainly better than false confidence. Agreed. Awesome. Great. Thanks, Caleb. Thanks, Michael. Thanks for listening to Stoa Conversations. Please give us a rating on Apple Podcasts or Spotify and share it with a friend. If you want to dive deeper still, search Stow Stoa in the App Store or Play Store for a complete app with routines, meditations, and lessons designed to help people become more stoic. And I'd also like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. You can find more of his work at ancientlar.com. And finally, please get in touch with us. Send a message to stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback, questions, or recommendations. Until next time.
