---
title: "Trolleys, Torture, and Moral Dilemma's (Episode 180)"
slug: trolleys-torture-and-moral-dilemma-s
episode_number: 180
youtube_id: zNrlR5xUngo
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zNrlR5xUngo
upload_date: 2025-04-22
duration: 1:00:46
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Caleb Montiveros and I'm Michael Trombble. And today we're going to be talking about stoic answers to moral dilemmas and some classic controversial thought experiments. So, it should be a fun one. Yeah, this was what I wanted to do. I'm excited for it. So, I mean, maybe I'm sure most people listening to this uh podcast have have experienced or heard some of these kind of thought experiments or moral dilemmas like the trolley problem. They're really popular in undergrad philosophy courses. There's something that I really enjoyed and philosophy in general really loves this idea of like playing with intuition, putting really evocative situations in front of you and asking you what your intuition might be or what the right thing to do is. And I think those are really good ways of of pulling out the implications of ethical theories or seeing how they would work in practice. I think there are also fun ways to get at what you believe with really concrete examples or your understanding of a current theory and how it would, you know, how how it would play out in that scenario. So, we're going to do that today with Stoicism. Kind of put our put our stoic hats on and talk about how at least how maybe maybe we'll disagree, Caleb, but how we think Stoics would answer these questions. I think it's going to be really fun. Um, so looking forward to it. Yeah, absolutely. Me, too. I think these are fun questions but also get at sort of these important moral issues, questions of moral value. And I think both the questions themselves and how you approach them can be very revealing. So should be fun to go along with these and you know think through what your own answers are, whether you think we represent the Stoics accurately or not and um you know email us with any disagreements or questions here. So uh but yeah, let's get into it. Yeah, I guess that's the right way to Well, you just hit on something for those, you know, listening, playing along at home. Um, I guess there's two separate questions. There's like what the Stoics think. Did we get that right? And then what you think? And maybe maybe there will be some cases where there's a difference between what you think and what the Stoics think. And that can kind of maybe reveal some interesting contrasts of where, you know, where you're fully stoic or where you're not. Cool. So to kick things off, we'll start with probably the most famous one, the most memed in current the current internet era at least, which is the trolley problem. Um, so this is this presents a scenario where uh a runaway trolley or train is headed down the tracks and there's some number of people tied down to the tracks is how it was first told to me. Uh, in this example, I pulled this five people and you you have the option to pull a lever. Maybe you're watching the train go. Maybe you're on the train. And if you pull the lever, you divert the trolley onto another track where there's only one person present. So the the way the the way the thought experiment is set up, at least in and I guess the important piece there is that you've had no involvement. You've kind of just found yourself in this situation. You didn't tie anybody down to the track. Nobody deserves to be there. Everybody's kind of like morally equivalent. And when when I learned this in undergrad, it's really used as this way of contrasting utilitarianism versus deontology. And utilitarianism is this this kind of you you determine the morality through this calculus of well five people's lives is better than one person's lives. So so clearly I pull the the lever and I kill the one person. And then the deontologist view is more rule-based. So there's these rule there might be a rule like you you cannot murder. And so if you find yourself in this situation, pulling the le lever is this equivalent of actually murdering this person. You're intervening in a way that causes that person to die. And so um maybe the deontologist might say, well, it's not appropriate to murder one person to save five lives. And then there's these kind of more progressive examples of this thought experiment. So if somebody does the utilitarian answer and says, "Oh, I would I would pull a lever. I would kill the one person to save five lives. You you might follow up and say, "Well, if you were this doctor, if you were a doctor, would you kidnap and harvest the organs of one person if it could save five people?" And people usually have this like averse reaction to that. And so, it's this fun way of of pulling out kind of, you know, I guess it's it's consequences versus actions, right? And what has more of a role to play? Any other setup in in for the trolley problem before we get into the stoic response? Yeah, I think that's a fine setup. I perhaps another way to frame it is, you know, consequences versus actions. There's also the question, is there any moral significance to the distinction between killing and letting die is something people also talk about. So, if you just let the trolley run its course and hits the five, in a sense, you're not killing anyone. you're just letting five die. Whereas if you hit the lever, then you're making a intentional decision to kill another person. And you know, there's that other that another way to frame it is, you know, is is there is that a significant distinction at all? Is that something that matters? He had a good point. So for me, I think this is a hard one. I I was I was trying to think about this a little bit beforehand, but not too much so that we could, you know, chat through it. I think the this so stoics their ethics I think this is going to come up time and time again their ethics is kind of really embedded in the context and the scenario it's like really hard there's not going to be many situations where the stoic is able to make a decision without any context and that be really clear like a lot of stoic ethics comes down I think there's this kind of rule of don't do anything irrational don't do anything based on an untrue belief but then a lot of stoic ethics is going to come down to your roles your relationships, you know, are you the train driver who's like swore this oath of minimizing harm? Um, do you have some sort of relationship to the people on the tracks? And this is something that when people first hear this problem, they always try to throw in those examples and philosophers like, "No, no, don't think about those examples. We're just trying to limit it." But I think the Stoics is going to be one of the schools that's going to try to do it. That being said, if we limit it just the situation, I think the Stoics are going to probably heir on the side of pulling the lever. I think they're going to heir on the side of killing the one and saving the five because I think that I mean many of the ways people ground the the issue with pulling the lever of like, oh, I would feel really bad about killing that one person or I would feel like it was my fault or um you know, some some I was told not to kill as a as a child and that's some sort of rule that I've just followed without reflection. I think a lot of the justifications for not pulling the lever the Stoics are not going to agree with. So without other without additional information, saving five lives is more important than saving one. And so they're going to air on the side of pulling the lever if you're just if you know if you have these kind of morally equivalent people on the track. That's my swing at it. What do you think? Yeah, it's a this one's a hard one. So, and you know, as you say, there's always that instinct to sort of fight the hypothetical. And I think that it can be a justified instinct and you ask these questions about, you know, what's really going on? Is there some other option? What who are the people involved? How they end up on the tracks? Why are things set up this way and such? But um but uh uh so if you if you I think those are important and I think it's a totally legitimate move for so to attack this form of reasoning perhaps even maybe even think like this isn't the right way to do ethics think through these different thought experiments. But that being said, setting that concern aside and just thinking through, okay, what what a stoic uh you know, what's the stoic to the extent that we can hold everything uh constant? What's the actual answer? Do you pull the lever or not? What's the best stab? My sense is, and this is not a very fun answer. I'll have more fun controversial answers later, but is that there's not a strong stoic prescription either way. I could see stoics airing on the horistic of in general it's better to save more people than not but I could also see them thinking well an essential part of justice is not killing people and it's not it's not just a matter of how you feel but it's having that strong disposition not to be involved in causing other people's death and I think I do think that stoics would would sort of hold that there is some distinction between killing people letting them die that just says different facts about, you know, the people involved both. It's it's a different thing to be a killer and to let someone die. I think those are uh there are different dispositions involved in those kinds of actions and or omissions. So that's I think that's might be a reasonable take. And as you say, as soon as you say you should pull the lever, then there are these other questions about different scenarios that um might be more troubling, more counterintuitive for people. Yeah. So, a bit of a I mean, we might be stuck here with that in between. I'm taking the controversial I'm going to say like 6040 lever pulling over here. You're more in the 50/50 side. I think I do like your point. I mean, there's something there. A big part of stoicism is accepting fate. So is there this idea like you know hey they just had a you know they found themselves tied to the tracks what can you do and is there some sort of metaphor there about like not accepting you know you're not really amoratine very well if you're pulling the lever but that's the kind of like lazy man argument yeah I think so that the stoics object to. So um okay we disagree on this one. I'm pulling I'm going a bit to the lever side. You're 50/50 in the middle. But overall, as you said, not really the way the Stoics do their ethics. Really a bit of a difficult one to do without further context. Yeah. Perhaps another way to add some more context would be so if you think about the physician example where I think the best way to set it up is you've got six people at a hospital. None of them are there by choice. It's not their fault or anything of this sort. And it just so happens that you can harvest the organs of five to save the one or sorry other way around. You can harvest the organs of one to save the uh five. And uh there I think stoics have a a good response related to people's roles, right? It's not the role of a physician to be making that sort of decision. and it would harm the institution of a hospital if people arrived at the hospital and thought there was some chance that they might be sacrificed for the collective essentially. So I wonder if um the the argument against your view Michael is well the relevant roles here are you're a citizen and maybe the citizens and you're building that into this right there's no Yeah, that's true. There's no I didn't say anything about Yeah, you could be in a foreign country. Yeah. Well, anyway, yeah, this is sort of interesting. Well, you're in some kind of community. So, I guess the question is, does that community have a a norm around this? And yeah, that's a good way of putting it. Yeah. So, generally, I don't think we expect people to be making these kinds of decisions unless they might be, as you said, the trained conductor or an engineer or somehow involved in uh enforcing justice or something like this at the broader level. So, and then it's sort of a question of, you know, what's the makeup of the community and do you expect people to Yeah. uh to to pull the lever in these kinds of situations. I mean, we could do a whole trolley problem episode, but I mean, I think I think the example I guess the counterargument here, which relates to another thought experiment I had, um, is, you know, does there kind of hit a point of absurdity though? we're pulling the lever, you know, regardless of community. Like you're trying to break the hypothetical and you're saying, "Look, we we make appeals to the, you know, what you do is you ask what community you're a part of. You can't make this question, it's 50/50. You can't answer this question of white. You have to ask what are the social norms of the people you're around and your community." And I'm not sure if that's the case. I don't know if we need to appeal to that there. You know, if there's a thousand people on the track, 10,000 people on the track, a million people on the track, there almost hits a point of absurdity, the way the same way you can make the the pulling the lever example absurd by by making it seem very cruel as the doctor to pick somebody and harvest their organs. Um, the you can make the not pulling the lever seem absurd by kind of upping the odds there, too. So, I I do think there is some weight there's just some weight to death outside of um outside of cultural norms. Um it's at least dispreferred. Yeah. Um but cool. Let's I think we can spend the whole time on this one. And no, I Yeah, before we move on, I think I think that's the right move the right move for the stoic the stoic defensive pooling as it were. Is that team pull? Yeah. At some point it seems obvious that you should pull the lever if there are enough people involved. So then the question is like why why would a stoic value killing as such when there are just simply more lives at stake and then the stoic I suppose the further rejoiner to that might be to take the hard line which some people do. you just shouldn't be involved in killing at all or think well you know these situations with larger numbers are really qualitatively different in some way so but uh yeah so that's so that's that's that one well I want to jump ahead to this related one which is the ticking time bomb scenario I remember doing this one in second year ethics um these are really fun to do in rooms full of people some that are interested in philosophy and some that aren't and some that are um you you know, have varying different feelings about it. But the ticking time bomb scenario, so it's a situation where a terrorist, you know, some sort of bad person has pl planted a bomb that's about to explode and you have the ability to torture the suspect to get information that could save lives. You can, the question is, should you torture the terrorist to find out where the bomb is? And you can kind of you can, you know, play the lever like, are you 100% certain they know where it is? Are you mostly certain they know where it is? You can kind of play with some of these scenarios. But I guess my answer to this one is that yes, the Stoic would say yes, you absolutely, it's absolutely morally permissible to torture to get information that saves lives. And I think because this scenario builds in the stuff that you were just talking about, it builds in cultural context, right? you've got somebody that is I I think a terrorist is like a politically loaded term but somebody who's who's you know in opposition to your community you're a member of that community and I think it's not permissible in all scenarios and there there becomes like an a question of scale right um but absolutely it's permitted on the in the higher higher extremes you know the the the real kind of you know 10,000 people lives at stake situations without a doubt. And that's that's the way that I view the stoic response because it builds in that cultural responsibility and it makes clear who that other person is as somebody um yeah that's trying to do something unjust or or harmful. What do you think? Yeah, absolutely. I think this is somewhere where I I agree I agree with what you just said and somewhere there's perhaps a more controversial uh answer from the Stoics perhaps. I mean the historical record I don't see any where were they made up strong objection to torture which some modern people do. I don't see that the ancient stoics making that those sorts of arguments uh saying that you know torture is never morally permissible. So it doesn't seem like there's this hard line. And then the question you know the relevant question is is this if this person is in fact a terrorist it's a different different setup from the trolling problem. are not innocent and uh the scale is so much larger such that uh torturing would be permissible. I think of course there this is this is another one where people want to challenge the hypothetical and I think these are important questions which is you know is torture actually effective and people and people argue that uh and uh then you can maybe get into a little bit of a thornier questions where you know say this person's a suspect but how much confidence do you have that they are in fact involved in the plot and that th those situations might be sticky. But when you get into cases where you're higher confidence uh that they're involved in the plot and that torture is going to be effective, which at some level I think it must must be uh it would be very surprising to me if it was never effective or you can never expect it to be effective. I think the Stoke would would be would endorse um you know effective effective torture here in order to prevent you know a very tragic event. Yep. So so far agnostic about trolley very pro torture is where is where we've landed after the first two. Um but yeah, no, I think it's just a a kind of pragmatic like a kind of pragmatism when it comes to protecting um your family or your community. And as you said, that can be pragmatically it can be not pragmatic at a certain scale of just repeating what you said, a certain scale of not being sure about its effectiveness. You know, if if one in 10,000 people knew where this bomb was and you went and tortured all 10,000 people, right? like there can become this point of of it not being pragmatic, but there's no hard and fast rule here, which is which the um which the ethical dilemma is trying to set up. It's trying to say, well, it's almost like a counterargument for people who are like, torture is never permitted. Are you willing to bite the bullet? And the stoic's like, well, no, I would not bite the bullet on that because I I think there are situations that where it's permitted, such as this one. It's not a kind of hard and fast rule, as you said. Yeah, absolutely. And I I do think that stepping back from the hypothetical some the the real question is sort of like you know how can you extract uh if you ever find yourself in one of these situations I suppose how can you extract the relevant information and perhaps torture isn't the right way to go about it especially for all people you know people have different tolerances to pain and such I might have value different uh there might be different keys to unlock the the needed information for people so there's going to be a skill at this kind of information extraction that is important to de develop and there's certainly going to be a sense in which torture is not ideal. You would I think just as people think about different conditions or principles for a just war there are going to be ideas about you know is this really necessary could you have gotten the information in a way that didn't cause as much suffering and of course the stoic is going to say you yes uh you should aim to reduce suffering where you can and it's not going to be uh the ideal route if there was something much better in it yeah your job is to get the information your job isn't to like punish this person or make them hurt or anything like that. And and so if there's a better way to get the information, not only should you choose that morally, I guess, but also pragmatically you should go about the better way to get the information. Yeah, absolutely. Cool. Um so on agree in agreement there. Next one is the the happiness machine. Um so this is another one another famous one. This is a machine that can provide you with unlimited pleasure and happiness by simulating perfect experiences like fulfilling desires or achieving goals while you're in a deep blissful state of unconsciousness. The machine would ensure you feel like you're living your best possible life, experiencing everything you want, but all of it would be artificial. So, this is like um this is like the person who wants to get plugged back into the matrix. you know, your body is just sitting somewhere um but you're experiencing um all of these things and and you feel wow, you feel like everything's great, but in reality um these are simulations. So the question is, do you plug in you? Why or why not? I think this is an unambiguous no for the Stoics. The Stoic guiding principle, if anything, is truth and living in accordance with nature. And I think this is neither truthful nor in accordance with our nature. Um it's not actual excellence or virtue. If you feel it through mental stimulation, you're not actually doing you're not actually fulfilling your function or your nature. Um you're just feeling like you're doing that which it's ultimately a hedonistic choice. it feels good but you're not actually achieving kind of your e your ethical ends or potential. Do you agree with that? Yeah, absolutely. This is an easy one. Don't plug in. Perhaps more challenging for other philosophies. But um you know I suppose if you want to extend extend it or some questions for Stoics would be are there other things like the happiness machine or like the experience machine that we experience consume or plug into throughout our lives that might fulfill almost a similar role simulations of uh of something instead of the real thing itself. So I think that's sort of the stoic challenge really getting to more of a practical point and moving away from the philosophical one where I think the philosophical one is certainly don't plug in and then perhaps there's more of a challenge around practical questions like okay to what extent is just consuming different forms of media plugging in or having personal narratives about your life that maybe don't map up into reality. That's uh that's sort of the stoic challenge where it makes me think of the Epicurian idea that mental pleasure is better than physical pleasure. That you can get a lot of mental pleasure from your memories. Like you can just sit around thinking about times you had fun in the past. And I mean I think there's that question for the Epicurans about would they plug in? But then there's also this picture if they say no that it seems like they're almost like building up this storehouse of good memories and then just kind of sitting around. I guess you know the same question you had about media or stories. I also think this idea of like nostalgia or any sort of time where we're tapping back into mental we're doing things that make us feel mentally comfortable and happy at the expense of truth or the expense of personal excellence is is um yeah I mean it's dangerous if not actively harmful. Yeah, that's a great point. And I think for there, you know, this the Stoics might say such a thing is an indifferent. And perhaps with this nostalgia case in particular, I can think of examples of people who recover the past and keep ideas or events alive in a good way. But you can also think of people who are too nostalgic and end up living in the past and missing the present. Mhm. So, uh that's I think that's a great example. Cool. Okay. is another easy one. This is the utility monster. I think it's kind of a criticism of utilitarianism, but I think it's worth talking about. Um, so the utility monster is a hypothetical entity that requires an enormous amount of resources to satisfy its desires, even if it means satisfying the well-being of many others. Question is, should you feed the utility monster which feels the most joy at the expense of others? So you know some pe person or group of people that feel incredibly incredibly happy. Uh do you have an ethical obligation basically to maximize their happiness at the expense of others? This is a common objection to utilitarianism which says the goal of life is the maximization of happiness in other people or like in aggregate yourself being one of many. Um for me the answer is obviously no. You've got no responsibility to feed the utility monster. Um, you've got no responsibility to make other people feel good for the sake of them feeling good. You've got a responsibility to do the right thing, which can often have the positive side effect of making people feel good. But the stoic is just never really aiming at pleasure. And so, it's not stuck in these difficult choices about, oh, if I make fun of this one, you know, if I make fun of this one kid, everybody else in class is going to laugh. And, you know, what's the math on that? everybody's more happiness than the one bullied guy. It's like the these are never problems for the stoics in the way they are for the utilitarians. So, it's like um it seems to me like it seems to me the answer Yeah. is is a no. Yeah, absolutely. This is another easy one for the Stoics. Say no to utility monster. And you can't really think of the uh the um the parallel for stoics or other virtue ethics where it's like what's what would that look like for the virtue ethicist? You know, having some being where you're trying to maximize their virtue at the expense of others that doesn't really work. And I mean it would be something like it would be something like uh I mean it would be the inverse. It would be like somebody who's like not willing to lie. It would almost be like the things the the stoics bite, you know, what if a what if a emperor asks you to lie and if not he's going to cut off your head, right? Like are you still going to maximize virtue in that situation? And the stoic is just like yes. Yes, I would. Um it's it's his job to compel me and it's my job, you know, to not be compelled. I think that's I think that's almost the reverse is you you put up a situation where virtue seems ridiculous compared to all these indifference and the Stokes are just going to say like too bad. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. It's uh Yeah. This not not the utility monster. What's the right phrase there? I don't know. The virtue monster. The stoic, right? The person the person who values virtue over anything else. Um cool. So, I'm going to keep running through these. Um, I'm enjoying this. Maybe go to one that's a little bit harder. Um, and this is the youthro dilemma. Not really a moral dilemma. More of kind of like an maybe maybe it's a epis maybe it's a maybe it's a moral dilemma. Maybe like an axiology like where value comes from. Um, but this is a famous one from Plato. I think we've talked about this before in the podcast. And the question is basically um are actions good because God commands them or does God command them because they are good? So in other words, does God create value or discover value? And if they create value, could they have chosen something else to be good? If they discover value, is God really that important to morality? Um and so the question is, does God create or discover value? Um what do you think about this? How would a stoic answer this uh platonic puzzle? Yeah. So I think just to frame it perhaps for stoics if you wanted to make it uh more of a live question for stoics. Stoics think the way to live is according to nature and then you might ask well is something good because it's in accordance with nature or does nature happen to line up with what is good? Um, and then you have some independent idea of goodness that perhaps is divorced from nature. I think that's that's one way to make the challenge a little more pointed for for stoics. What do you think about that? That kind of I think it's a good way of putting it like because the stoics claim that the universe is providential, right? Which it claims that the universe is unfolding in the best possible way. So the way to question is like is the universe unfolding in the best possible way because it's aiming at some sort of target that is good outside of the universe or that the universe recognizes in some way and aims towards or is the universe unfolding the best possible way almost like a descriptive claim because whatever way the universe unfolds becomes good because it is nature and it's just your job to kind of uh love your fate as it occurs. That was less clear than the way you put it. But yeah, I think it's like you want to live in accordance with nature. Is nature on to the good? Is nature like intelligent perceiving the good and pursuing it and and matching it or is yeah is it more of a descriptive claim where like you know what is natural is good. You have the sort of the question so philosophers will talk about metaethics. So it's sort of a metaethical question about the nature of the good and the metaphysics of nature as it were. But to get more applied some stoics like Musonius Rufus in particular has a number of examples where he'll argue something is you know you ought to choose something because it is natural you know it is natural to have a particular kind of diet beard life what have you and of course you can question whether he's properly identified what is natural but there's also the move many philosophers have made throughout history which is just if something's natural if it's in accordance with nature who cares you know why I think that's good at all is and you know why reason that way to begin with so that's um that's perhaps that's another way to make the the sort of map up the questions about the nature of ethics goodness nature and such to these applied questions about you know what's good or about what one ought not to So you're saying but and so which way are you landing on on on the question? Well, I think so. I think what the stoic needs to do is sort of go between so they've got to this is sort of a dilemma and they I think they need to say it's a kind of a false dilemma or something of this sort where they identify it's not exactly identifying the good with nature but um well I suppose just to make the dilemma a little clearer like you don't want to make I don't think the stoic wants to say good is sort of independent of nature. I think that's that's too platonic. The Stoics were not platonists. Uh though sometimes some might talk like that. Um but they also don't want to say nature is arbitrary. You know, in the same sense like you know God could say that murder is morally permissible. Therefore it becomes morally permissible. If the if if nature had turned out such that murder was natural, would that make it uh permissible? I think the Stoics and also theists people believe in God would need to say, you know, that sort of situation doesn't make sense because God is identified with goodness. Nature grounds goodness and has it's necessarily it cannot be uh any other way. you know that world where nature promotes vice doesn't make any sense that's not a very clear route perhaps but I think they you know nature what is god for the stoics it's this form of reason provides providence provides structure to the world and part of that structure is what we believe is good beautiful and true and such and it can't it can't turn out it's not independent from the way things are but it also isn't arbitrary So that that's sort of the line I think they need to they need to walk. Yeah. I was trying to so a couple things I was thinking while you were talking. One is like this is not a moral dilemma. The other it's not similar to the other ones because the other ones were you know this has happened. Do you do A or B? This is this is Plato constructing a dichotomy. And so it is a viable play for the Stoics to say that's a false dichotomy. Those don't have to be the only two choices. In the same way, it's it's not a a fair play to say with the pulling the lever or the trolley problem. It's just like, well, just answer the question, right? So, that's that's the that's what you're saying the play is, which I agree with. And then they've got to kind of sketch this middle path between these two. And I was trying to think of an example. And is this fair? Um, does fire discover heat or does fire create heat? And if fire created heat, couldn't it create water instead? And then you'd have to call water heat. It almost becomes nonsensical. I don't know if that was that was a first try, but um there's something to be said about it doesn't have to be creation or discovery. Or maybe maybe the answer is something like if it is creation, there's like almost an essentialness to the goodness of the creation in a way that it's not as if it would have been impossible for God to create otherwise or to be otherwise. Um, yeah, maybe this is pushing my metaphysics a bit far, but I think you almost have to do something like that. Maybe you maybe you pick the God creates value line, but you recontextualize it to say, you know, it creates it almost eminently. It doesn't like it doesn't decide from a list of things that it could have decided differently. Yeah. It's it's not sort of arbitrary creation out of a set of options. It's more Yeah. God constitutes this thing or grounds this kind of trying to say. Yeah. The sort of the phil other philosophical metaphors Perhaps the Stoics also make similar might point to mathematics in a similar way. You know, could could things have turned out such that 2 plus 2= 5? No, necessarily. 2 + 2 equals 4. And that's just part of the structure of things and and goodness perhaps has a has a similar shape. Well, Plato's got those tough ones, but I think that's I think that's where So, I guess I guess there's like the truth of the matter and then it's like where the Stoics would land. I think I think you've described that well. I think that that's how the Stoics would try to respond to this is try to say there's some sort of like logical necessity to this um that that makes it like different from this kind of arbitrary selection from options. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. Cool. Yeah, that was a hard one for us. That's it's like another one on um so another one here is the sinking ship. So the dilemma involves a a ship that is sinking. There's only enough room on a lifeboat for two people, but there are three people on board. How do you choose who to sacrifice? What are the factors that matter most here? So not so much a dilemma maybe as like a creative problem. So you know when when you've got three people and you can only save two, by what criteria do you make that decision? Um yeah. Do you want to take a first step? Yeah. So, are you uh I assume you're one of the people in this situation? Yeah, you're one of the people. Yeah. So, I think a few things that would be relevant here for the Stoics would be, of course, we've mentioned this before, but roles, you know, you have this idea of a captain, a captain goes down with the ship and such, and other ideas like women and children first. That's I think perhaps a more controversial one. Family ties matter a lot. And I think those would be the kind of things that a stoic would bring bring to bear to this this kinds of question perhaps age. Uh and and then of course practical ones where if you're there's no point in someone not going down with the ship if say they're not going to be able to you can't expect them to survive on a lifeboat. So I think those those would be sort sort of situations at play. What do you think? Yeah, those are great. I I agree with those. I think another thing that that I think about is like you know this kind of discipline of ascent and uh a lot a large part of stoicism is like understanding how to die die die die well and I don't think you need to that means being like self-sacrificial unnecessarily but I think it means you know how would you act if you were not afraid of death would be like one of the governing things. So you'd have these considerations but the considerations would almost be the same as if you weren't one of the three right? like the considerations you would you would need to treat yourself objectively and that means both surviving if it's right for you to survive and dying if it's right for you to die. I guess it becomes more maybe maybe more controversial if it's like what if it's you and your child and uh you know another adult you can't trust like do do you have some sort of reason to band together against the third person if there's like family involved or something? Um, I'm not sure. But I think that would be the key is like using the considerations you said and then also applying those considerations objectively to yourself and not letting your fear of death uh make everybody just default to, well, I should be one of the the two. Who's the other person going to be? Yeah, the fear that's a great way to put it. That's a good way to put it. And uh I think it the problem does become harder where it you have say you you have a family tie or some other reason to survive but no one wants to go down with the ship. So then you have I think harder questions around okay do you use violence to survive? Uh and um in some cases I think the stoic answer just must be yes but I'm sure there are harder questions uh where you know it's it's not you your child and someone you can't trust but it's you your child and someone else's child who you've made promises to look after in that case and maybe you've also made promises to your child to take care of them. So I think that's that's a sort of case that's really that's going to be challenging where uh you you're going to be torn in different different directions. [Music] Mhm. Yeah. A tough one. I mean there's no right answer to this I don't think because there's no we don't we didn't give like a set of people but so it's like you know don't don't let false judgments or passions around fear of death distort your thinking. And then there comes down as you and then I think the considerations you raised on roles. The stoic certainly in their time I think would have those more traditional norms of women and children or you know prioritizing some groups over others. And then maybe as you said you know kind of promises or obligations you've made to to some people over others. Anything else to add on this one? No that's a hard one. I think those are some of the relevant considerations. Those are definitely some of the relevant considerations and um I am stuck with that. I think that phrase is a it's a useful framing. You know, how would you act if you aren't afraid of death is a useful framing and I think a good check on perhaps rationalizing reasons why why you ought to survive instead of others. It's very tempting. Yeah, that's a that's a good move. Cool. So, next one is the prisoners dilemma. Not really. Like again, maybe pushing the definition of moral dilemma here, but I think these are like interesting applied questions. Um, so many people probably already heard of this. This is the idea that two prisoners are arrested for a crime and held in separate cells, unable to communicate. They're each offered a deal. If one confesses and betrays the other, they go free while the other receives a long sentence. If both remain silent, they receive shorter sentences. If both confess, they receive a moderate sentence. What should you do? confess or betray. And there's this almost this this game theory idea and there's this you're in this position of being, I guess, passive or aggressive. And if you're aggressive, you basically lock yourself into good or moderate, a good or moderate scenario. If you're passive, you you lock it into good for both of you. If you don't betray, it's either good for both of you, uh, shorter sentence, or um, bad, like really bad for you because the other person sold you out. So, it's kind of this idea. I think it's this question of like, do you go on the offense or I don't know if it's defense, but do you or do you not go on the offense is kind of the question in this situation. I think the stoic doesn't betray. I think this is a good example of what Epictitus does with the talks about with the emperor who tries to convince the politician to you know vote his way instead of honestly. It's it's say you know it's not your responsibility to try to game theory play the decisions of other people and do this kind of costbenefit analysis based on their vice or virtue. It's, you know, you you pick the right decision in a vacuum and you understand that decision comes with a bad consequence, but that could come with a bad consequence, but but you're okay with that. It's part of the, you know, sometimes virtue has consequences. That's my swing at it. What do you think? I think I generally agree but would say that I don't think you make your decision in a vacuum here because the to me it's a question about cooperation and one way of framing this is if you you both cooperate if you both confess and then you'll uh well you're co you're cooperating if you in the in the way. I mean, there's different ways of doing this. And the way I wrote it, you're cooperating by both remaining silent. Yeah. Gotcha. If you both agree not to cooperate, then you get then you get like a medium-term sentence. The worst sentence is when only one person confesses and the other person doesn't, then the then the person who doesn't confess in that situation. Yeah. It's really like you cooperate. I I I use the idea of like aggressive versus passive, but it's it's really like a cooperate versus try to screw the other person. And cooperating makes you vulnerable to them trying to screw you is the Yeah, the setup. Yeah, that's right. So, I suppose the you cooperate and that involves typically going to involve remaining silent here and being open to the other person perhaps uh betraying you uh in this case. So, I think I think that's generally going to be the civic answer. That being said, there might be cases where this is fighting the hypothetical a little bit, of course, but you know, if you're involved in breaking an unjust law, perhaps you confess that you in fact did it as a matter of protest, right? In many cases of people historically protesting injustice and then sort of going through with a legal process regardless uh as a symbolic act. Um, I think that can be politically powerful, but you'd only do that, and this is why I'd say I'd question thinking of making the decision in a vacuum if you knew the other person would also confess because you don't want to be the person who basically confesses and the other person remains silent and then oppose them. So, so another way of putting that is like the stoic is not the stoic is not uncontextually a cooperator. they don't default to cooperation uh without additional context. Um or maybe they do default to cooperation but they don't necessarily cooperate if more context comes up but um they won't they won't betray just for the hope of of decreasing their sentence. Like decreasing their sentence is not a good reason for a stoic to betray. Um yeah. Yeah. Perhaps another way to put it is the the stoic will cooperate, but what that looks like in terms of acting with the other person might be different depending on on the circumstances and the context. And just as you say, they're not going to betray someone for the sake of getting a shorter sentence here. Cool. Um, okay, we've got two more. Um, do you want to run through these, Caleb? These are these are these are yours. Yeah. So there's another sort of challenge to utilitarianism called the omal child. It's from a short story by Ursula Ka. Imagine a utopian society where everyone thrives but their happiness depends on the suffering of a single permanently tortured child locked away in filth. If the child is freed, the utopia collapses. The question is as a member of the society, do you accept this bargain or are you going to essentially out of protest leave Omalas and be one the one of them be one of the few who walk away from the utopia that's run on the suffering of this single torture child. So that's the that's the the thought experiment. What are your reactions? Well, my reaction I mean are they always a child? Is it the same child or do we rotate? Um, the child aspect makes it interesting too because I think Ursula Kayla Gwyn is trying to maybe make the suffering seem more great. But, you know, if it was an adult, maybe we could maybe we could give that person some sort of role, really put them on an altar of appreciation, you know, because this seems to be like a factual relationship between utopia and physical suffering. The my other reaction is I think it's interesting that the question isn't should you torture the child. The question is do you leave? you're it basically it seems to me like you're getting external benefit because of somebody's viciousness and it's like do you accept that tradeoff and I guess the stoic answer to that needs to be no right like the stoic answer is not again like I mean you can think of this in other examples you know if somebody had slaves that they treated terribly if some if you were friends with someone who was very rich who made their money through sweat shops you can you can change these to more practical examples. The stoic is not going to yeah not going to I guess associate with that with that with those kind of situations and those kinds of people just for external benefit. Maybe the epic Korean does. doesn't keep blasting them, but maybe people who are just interested in pleasure do. Um, but the stoic, they don't have a benefit, right? They're not benefiting from the this utopia, which is presumably a material utopia, not like an ethical utopia because it requires being bad people to sustain. Um, yeah. So, my my first gut is that they leave. Um, yeah, this is kind of the extreme opposite of the utility monster. It's like instead of one person feeding you, you really suffer. You really crush the one person to make the happiness of all. Um, yeah. And I guess my my quick answer is that that's going to be no because that's a pleasure happiness or an external good happiness and the stoic isn't there there's no uh they're not that's not a worthwhile choice for them. But that might be a bit too self-sacrificial. What do you think? Yeah, I think that's probably uh right. But um I wonder the case for stain as it were is if if you look at analogous situations, you know, you have this the sweat shop case you just gave, the kinds of defenses people make of those sorts of things is that look, that's the best option given the alternatives. You know, the alternative to someone working in a sweat shop is them making money by picking up trash in a landfill or something of this sort. And if we don't build a sweep shot here, that's what's going to happen. Uh so I suppose if you tie that to the uh Omlas case, that's you're leaving isn't going to make a difference to the outcome. And if this child wasn't tortured, then there would be no utopia. And that's I think that's perhaps how some stoics in the past might have justified other kinds of injustices. But I think that's the kind of move someone would make in for justifying, you know, this kind of thing, causing others to suffer for the sake of some some uh so putting it in saying some greater good isn't the right stoic framing. So um I think it can't just be that utopia is something you passively enjoy. I think it's got to be something that is valuable and you know people who stay there play a good role in creating and sustaining. So it's in in that sense it's it's got to be something worth promoting. Uh perhaps like civilization is worth promoting today. And I think that's saying something more than it's just something that makes people feel good, right? It's no you have these ideas of justice, courage, and such. They're involved in promoting civilization. Perhaps that's the same with utopia. Anyway, that's a little bit of a Yeah, long rant, but uh one again like if I if I I'm kind of portraying the utopia as a bunch of experience hedonistic experience machines, right? But maybe it's the situation where it allows people, you know, leisure time. It allows them to study philosophy. It allows people to build these kind of projects for the greater good. Um and I guess this is one of those examples that the stoics lived in, right? And maybe you have on one hand you're more hardcore stoics like an Epictitus who's like I'm going to go start a school somewhere else and get out of this Roman Empire and maybe on the other hand you have someone like a Senica who's like well you know yeah I could walk away from Nero who's and like but like what good does that do the current situation better to you know immerse myself in this there doesn't seem to be any chance of change in in Ursula's situation which is what makes it a bit more of a dilemma but I guess at that point you kind of have to be all in or all out where you either remove yourself or you dedicate yourself to making it the best utopia possible and maximizing the good because of the sacrifice being made. But yeah, like I like you were on it's not like the Roman Empire wasn't built on, you know, some terrible working conditions, slavery and suffering and all these kinds of things. And Senica and Marcus Aurelius were, you know, in different roles but at the top of that pyramid. Um they didn't remove themselves from it. Yeah, absolutely. So I I think at the first pass the stoic answer would be to to walk away. But perhaps when you especially when you construe the thought experiment as more of a utilitarian one where you know utopia is just something you passively enjoy, it's very pleasurable or something like that. But if you think about I think that that some of the challenge making it a little more thornier is thinking about so it's a case of great suffering but you know what's created is arguably in effect good and the people involved are playing good virtuous roles then perhaps the at least the best the best as they can then the questions become a little bit more thorny and I think that's that's that's related to some of these practical questions involve today, you know, involving uh sweat shops, the way we treat animals and such. So, and uh I'm not not saying one way is right or the other or making a statement about those kinds of decisions, but uh I think that's that's one way to make this thought experiment for Yeah, a lot of the a lot of these have a lot in common, right? Like it brings me back to the brings me back to pulling the lever, right? Like you're you're pulling the lever. I don't know if it's exact metaphor, but you're pulling the lumber straight into this poor kid locked away in filth and you're you're making a utopia for other people because of that. Interesting one. Any Did you want to hit this last one or did you do we got to call it for time? No, we could call it for time. I think that's uh Any final takeaways? Let's see. Yeah, in terms of general themes, a a question sort of the and thinking about what's morally relevant for stoics. Some of the easier thought experiments involved, you know, cases that maximize pleasure or something of that sort where the stoic can say no, you know, the happiness machine, the experience machine not that valuable, the utility monster, not a challenge for stoic ethics. And then I think where you get into some of these trickier situations, you know, the sinking ship, the questions really become, you know, who are you? What are your roles? What does acting virtuous look like here? And those are the kinds of things a stoic would uh take seriously. And perhaps, you know, given the nature of these thought experiments, there's not going to be an easy answer, easy general answer, even though there might be better answers in specific situations. Yeah, I think that's right. So like there there's some cases where there's pattern there's some pattern recognition, black and white. Okay. If the dilemma is around maximization of pleasure, as you said, not that compelling, but everything else it's going to be, it's not like you can just be like, "Oh, well, does it involve killing?" Because then it's wrong. Oh, does it involve torture? Cuz then it's wrong. Does it involve It's not even as simple as it's not even clear that as a stoic you should be the one to stay on the boat and sacrifice your life. It's just not these black and white clearcut answers as you called out. I think I think the flip side of that though is like they're also not hard and fast on these deontology rules. Like there's going to be some situations where it's okay to kill. There's going to be some situations where it's okay to torture. There's going to be some situations um you know you're you're pursu you're pursuing virtue, but virtue is contextual. It's not a kind of a heristic or or law following or rule-based. you know, you're going to tend to cooperate, but there's going to be some situations where cooperating the prisoners dilemma doesn't make sense. And I I can be a bit unsatisfying. Um, but ultimately, you know, more robust and nuanced and life is nuanced. So, um, I prefer it that way, but a bit less of a, you know, not not as like clear-cut as utilitarianism or at least simplistic deontology can be. Yeah. I I wonder though if a different framing is and perhaps we've sold the view that you know there are just some things you actually should not do or some things you actually should do. Perhaps you sold that view short. I wonder if a different framing is you know when you're thinking about these sorts of thought experiments then the questions become dependent on context. But once you've defined the context clearly enough, you can you you actually can come up with rules or perhaps even a absolute prohibitions or specific people. You know, for most people, you could say you should never torture someone or you should always you should never be in a situation like the uh Amalos type situation or uh perhaps something like that. Um anyway, I think that's I wonder if if there's there's just some kind of move move there like once you've defined the roles, who you are and such. I I I just wouldn't want someone some someone to come away from this conversation and think that there's nothing to sort of absolute maybe more uh black and white views because of course famously throughout history stoics have had very hardline moral views whether of course it's Ko the younger defending the fall of the Roman Republic or Stoics people influenced by stoicism who uh wanted to prohibit slavery even if did promote the greater good and they would have listened to people about it's more of a nuance type situation and the sort of justifications people would give for treating humans differently. So I I wonder if I I just it's I wouldn't want to sell the the sort of hardline moral type views too short. I mean I think it's a good push back, right? Like when you read Epictitus, he's pretty prescriptive. He's not like oh well it depends. He's very prescriptive about you should do this, you shouldn't do this. Someone threatens you to throw you in jail, let them throw you in jail. Um, I think I think you hit the nail on the head where it's like they just don't do this kind of reasoning of like, you know, you you're this like generic floating through space person without a past and you find yourself in this situation. What do you what do you do? They just didn't really use these examples. I mean, you said they're prescriptive. It's like, okay, you are a senator and a tyrant threatens you to do something. what do you do? Well, it's very prescriptive then, right? As as you brought up about um once you have those rules in place, then it can get really really prescriptive. I agree. And yeah, it's not relativistic. I would hate to say that it's not relativistic, it's just context specific, but the context doesn't have to be so specific. It's like, well, we can't even mention it. Even just getting some roles on the like, you know, that that's your child, that's your brother or sister, that's your parent. Once you get some of that content on the table, you're, you know, you're you're moving. Um, and a lot of these thought experiments are set up to to remove those, which is not really, I guess, how the Stoics did ethics. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah, that's well put. Cool. Well, let us know if you think there's some other moral dilemma we should take on or if you think we got one of these wrong. Yeah, that'd be great. I would I would enjoy to see other people's opinions. All right, Michael. Thanks, Gil. Thanks for listening to Stowa Conversations. Please give us a rating on Apple Podcasts or Spotify and share it with a friend. If you want to dive deeper still, search Stowa in the App Store or Play Store for a complete app with routines, meditations, and lessons designed to help people become more stoic. And I'd also like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. You can find more of his work at ancientlar.com. And finally, please get in touch with us. Send a message to stoa@ stoameditation.com if you ever have any feedback, questions, or recommendations. Until next time.
