---
title: "Two Practices For Zen Stoicism (Episode 201)"
slug: two-practices-for-zen-stoicism
episode_number: 201
youtube_id: MWmdfuUYWzg
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MWmdfuUYWzg
upload_date: 2025-09-16
duration: 20:50
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stowa Conversations. My name is Caleb onto Veros and today is going to be a solo episode. Michael's off doing some work travel, so it's just me and uh I've been reading a number of Zen works lately and thinking about what Stoics can take from Zen. So I'll go through some passages from a Zen work I stumbled upon which I thought were quite fruitful and relevant for day-to-day practice. Relevant for cultivating a stoic sense of mind would be one way to put it and uh let's dive into it. So the relevant work was written by a fellow named Gino. Apologies about the pronunciation. I believe he's I believe he was Korean. His work, the straightforward explanation of the true mind. And this is a 12th century Zen work and it's translated by a fellow named Thomas Clearary. So just as an aside, Thomas Clearary is as far as I can see see an excellent translator of Buddhist Zen Dowist works. I think he's translated around 80 works. He recently recently passed away but must have lived an excellent life simply translating a massive amount of important works. uh not just from the Eastern traditions, but he also has a translation of the Quran, which I've heard a number of Muslims speak highly of. Of course, I can't directly speak to the quality of his translations. I don't have any expertise in the relevant languages and I'm not wellversed enough to compare different translations against one another. But the mere fact that he's translated so many works and had a background initial background in the academy uh but was able to create a life outside of that as a translator I think is worthy of recognition. So it sounds to me like he lived an excellent life at least from the works he left behind. He's translated this work the straightforward explanation of the true mind and it has several sections explaining concepts from Zen and but the specific but the specific one I want to focus on today is about practice and there are there are 10 different forms of practice in this section labeled the True Mind Stops Delusion. It's on page 252 of Classics of Buddhism and Zen volume 3 in case you're interested in picking this up. I'm in particular interested in I'm interested in both of these, but in particular interested in the second one. I'll read the first one as well, just so you get a flavor of these exercises. As introductory remarks, the passage is as follows. Teachers of the past have given various different kinds of explanations of doing exercises in mindlessness. Now let us sum up the main principles in brief elucidations of 10 kinds. Number one, alert observation. When doing the inner work, you always cut off thoughts and prevent thoughts from arising. The instant a thought arises, you immediately break through it by awareness. When errant thoughts are broken through by awakenness, following thoughts do not arise, then you no longer need this awakening knowledge. When confusion and awakening are both forgotten, this is called mindlessness. Therefore, a master teacher said, "Do not fear thoughts arising. Just be wary of being slow to become aware of it." There's also a verse that says, "You do not need to seek reality. Just stop entertaining views and opinions." This is working on stopping illusion by alert observation. Number two, sessation. When you work, do not think of good or bad. When the mind is aroused, stopped right away. When you encounter objects, cease and desist. An ancient said, "Be like a piece of white silk. Be cool. Be like the sensor in an abandoned temple. Then you are free from vagueness and detached from false discrimination. Be like an ignoramus or a dunce and then you will attain some accord. This is working on stopping illusion by putting the mind to rest. So those are the two passages. Then let's go over some of the concepts and ideas here. Then we can turn to some stoic passages as well. So number one we have alert observation. And it's a practice essentially of simply noticing the thoughts and not being taken in by them. Not letting the mind stop. Remaining alert. Not letting the mind be detained. As the master's line goes, do not fear thoughts arising. Just be wary of being slow to become aware of it. He also cites a verse that says you do not need to seek reality. Just stop entertaining views and opinions. That's of course quite similar to the stoic thoughts. It's not things in themselves that harm us, but our opinions of them. And sometimes people think Zen, meditation, mindfulness, what have you, is about not thinking. And in a sense it is about not thinking about stopping thoughts. I think one could say that. But of course there's also the thought that being alert requires mental movement. And to say that it's about you know the act of squashing every thought that arises or putting effort into not thinking of course that just is another form of thought. So I think that's a kind of confusion one should be careful to avoid this practice. It's about being alert. This this second practice is closer I think to stopping thought. what we might mean when we say that phrase anyway. Cessation. When you work, do not think of good or bad. When the mind is aroused, stop right away. To my ear, this practice brings up value judgments, noticing those value judgments and ceasing to make them as soon as they arise. He says, "Be like the sensor in abandoned temple." A sensor, that's a bowl for burning incense. And he also says, "Be like an ignoramis or a dunce." There's also some nice connections with Greek philosophy here. Of course, it's better to be in a state of ignorance, known ignorance, where you know you don't know, than it is to have an opinion that is false, vague, useless. One argument for this practice that stoics can take away is that why you know why is cessation useful is because so many of our value judgments are mistaken vague not useful. That's why it can be a powerful practice not just for a Zen practitioner but for a stoic. And of course, you do have to flag that the Zen goal is for attaining a kind of true mind, a kind of a Zen state that has overlap with the Stoic goal, of course, but is I don't think it's the same. There's there is significant overlap, but I don't but I think it would be a mistake to say that the ultimate goal between a Zen practitioner and the Stoic is is identical. With that in mind, I wanted to there are a number of passages from the Stoics that focus on eliminating opinion, cultivating one's attention. But I wanted to focus on a longer one from Marcus Aurelius. This is meditations 36. If you find anything better in human life than justice, honesty, moderation, and courage, if to put it generally, you find anything better than the self-sufficiency of your mind on these occasions when it ensures that your actions are compatible with right reason, as well as when something is allotted to you by fate without your having chosen it. If, I say, you're aware of anything better than this, turn to it with all your heart and enjoy the supreme good you've discovered. But if you find nothing better than the guardian spirit lodged within you, which has brought all your particular impulses under its control, which scrutinizes your thoughts, which as Socrates used to say, has withdrawn itself from sensations, which has put itself in the god's hands, and which cares providentially for other people. If everything else turns out to be trivial and worthless by comparison, then make room for nothing else. The point is that once you've turned your attention elsewhere and turned aside from your path, it will be impossible for you to give your undivided attention in the highest honor to the good that is peculiarly your own. It's sacriiggious for what is rational and contributes to the common good to be rivaled by anything that is different in kind, such as popularity, political power, wealth, or sensual pleasure. all things that afford a brief illusion of happiness, but then suddenly overpower one and leave one astray. So, as I say, you must simply and freely choose the better course and stay with it. But what is better is what does me good. If it does you good as a rational being, don't dispense with it. But if it does you good as an animal, spurn it and keep to your original decision without preining yourself on it. Just make sure that you conduct your inquiry without coming to harm. So there's a lot here. Again, this is meditations 36, the translation from Robin Waterfield, another excellent translator. And there are a number of themes from it. But if we connect it to these practices, these Zen practices of alert observation and cessation, stoic, a kind of stoic practice comes into view where Marcus Aurelius is monitoring his thoughts, vigilantly monitoring his thoughts and insisting that their focus, his undivided attention is on the highest honor to the good that is peculiarly his own and that is the idea of the stoic good. This is what his what he wants his undivided attention to be on a part of that involves rejecting anything that does not keep him on that path. So here one could apply a sessation practice for these val for the value judgments we make of good and bad concerning anything that is not you know the ultimate good for stoics doing your best being virtuous exemplifying justice honesty moderation and courage there are a number of levels to explain that of course making excellent decisions with regard to indifference But the typical the typical thoughts we have do not concern the typical value judgments we make do not concern this ultimate good, this focus, this purpose for the stoics. And as such we can apply as such one can apply the practice of sessation simply letting those thoughts go noticing when they arise and stopping them. Do not be detained by thoughts that are different in kind. As Marcelia says, anything that concerns popularity, anything that concerns mere mere pleasure, these sort of animal aspects of one's life, these sorts of normal almost innocent seeming judgments one makes that on their own may make for minor mistakes but taken as a whole detain the stoic projects. The skilled stoic is able to make excellent judgments. Uh and that comes from the practice of of course reducing mistakes, ceasing to make ceasing to make judgments about what is good and what is bad that are mistaken. And that of course is quite broad. If you're thinking about, you know, what are some examples here? Well, these are decisions you make because something feels good, because it is popular, because you want to avoid pain, because you want to avoid the rejection of a social group instead of simply making excellent decisions. And these sorts of mental movements, if you just think about, you know, pursuing pleasure, avoiding pain, can be quite quite subtle. So if you're able to sort of set I think it's a an interesting practice to set a challenge of noticing those movements towards pleasure for its own sake pain avoiding pain for its own sake and perhaps trying to resist those instead thinking rationally through what one ought to do you know. So I think this ultimately this idea is a simple you get a simple practice ruthlessly monitor your thoughts and dissolve any false or ignorant opinions thoughts that don't represent reality and do not amount to knowledge and uh I think the point isn't just to reframe these thoughts you know although that is a useful stoic practice you know I'm feeling anxious that's because I have some value judgment about the some possible future prevent being bad for me. You know, I could reframe these thoughts and bring to mind, you know, the possibility that, you know, perhaps things will turn out well for me or reframe nervousness into excitement or something of this that sort. You know, that that's not the point. The point isn't even to convince yourself that a given opinion is false with philosophy and dialectic. you know, you have some urge to waste time because doing so would be pleasurable. The advice isn't to reason with yourself about, you know, your judgment that I ought to waste time because it would feel good versus your vision of a good life involves more than merely feel feeling good. You know, you can have a sort of internal debate, kick off an internal debate that can be useful and perhaps some sort of Socratic questioning, cultivating inner discourse. But the point of this practice isn't to do that. It's just to simply stop. Notice that you've made a judgment. Notice that you've that your thought was mere opinion and then return to the matter at hand. You know, perhaps, you know, I I said earlier, ruthlessly monitor your thoughts. But perhaps you could also think of this as in a more zen fashion perhaps of effortlessly cultivating a kind of effortless awareness you might speak of or a gentle monitoring that's simply ready to cease any false opinions that arise. And we can break this down more with some ideas from stoic psychology. We have the initial impression any sensation then we reflect on it then we decide to agree to it. So here we have if I'm thinking about the the earlier example while working I notice a temptation to waste time that sensation can take a number of different forms maybe it has some physical properties mental properties there's some image associated with it you know this sort of bare stuff of that makes up consciousness that impression that sense that can come together into a judgment you know I I want then and then becomes I want to waste time or it might not be framed in that way but I deserve to take a break or you know this opportunity would be much more would be more fun and I like to do things that are that are fun instead of whatever I set my mind to earlier in the day. Uh so that impression becomes a a full-blown judgment. We reflect on it and then ascent to it. This process very fast of course a very fast process through impression reflection ascent which eventually becomes desire motive motive for action. often our language even just as I spoke about this process blurs these steps together especially when it comes to judgments about things so simple as pleasure and pain and uh I think that's where this these practices of cultivating attention noticing opinions can be so useful in breaking down some of the finer aspects of our experience. At least that's how I find them and that's perhaps why I've been drawn to some of the Zen works recently is different ways of describing conscious experience and even though they're not as focused on the ideas of reason as a stoics. I think stoics can certainly take away a lot of it can take away a lot from how they speak about mental movements, attention, these ideas of mindlessness, preferring ignorance over illusion. So again to boil this down into a simple stoic practice if you will the idea is to be vigilant be attentive with respect to your thoughts and dissolve any false or ignorant ones. Keep that as a focus of the day and seeuh how it works for you. Bile. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use, and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at Stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
