---
title: "What We Read, Watched, and Learned in 2025 (Episode 216)"
slug: what-we-read-watched-and-learned-in-2025
episode_number: 216
youtube_id: hvVuohtyjWI
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hvVuohtyjWI
upload_date: 2025-12-30
duration: 42:43
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to STOA Conversations. My [music] name is Caleb Monteiveros. And I'm Michael Tromblé. And today we thought it'd be fun to do a little bit of a year in review episode. Just thinking about some of the conversations that stuck out to us and things we've read or written that uh maybe deserve a shout out, deserve some extra considerations uh or reflections perhaps as we come up to the end of the year. Yeah, sounds great. Looking forward to it. >> Might also be fun to add something that we've watched perhaps at the very end just uh for a little bit of uh I suppose popular culture, popular entertainment content for all of our Stowa content consumers out there. But uh in terms of yeah so this year one conversation and reading project we did that I thought was excellent and I encourage stoics to think think about this work cuz we went through the whole of Cicero's on ends which I hadn't read since uh grad school and um I don't think we even went through the last book uh when I read it last. So, and that with so much I have much more context on stoicism in general than when I was in school. And re rereading that work was uh both very enjoyable. I like reading Cicero, but I think more uh I mean just goes to show when you have more context, revisiting something a little later in life can make the work seem more much more much more rich than when you uh first encountered it. So that was certainly true for me and we had a number of conversations about it that I uh that I enjoyed. Yeah, we did I mean we did five episodes on that which was which was worth it because for those that haven't listened to those on ends Cicero goes through the philosophical arguments for epicurinism stoicism a version of um arisatilianism and he the thing that I like the most about that book it's really well written it's pretty plain in its language for an ancient text Like most ancient texts, you read them and you're like, what is this person even talking about? Or you read it and it's like Marcus Aurelius where Marcus is very wise a lot behind what he's saying. But if it seems too intuitive, there's almost this risk that you're reading your own understanding of the world into it and you're not actually, you know, you're reading Marcus Aurelius as confirming your um intuitions and your current life perspective, not reading him as a stoic. [snorts] And so it it's not common to have an ancient source that's meant to communicate a view in plain language. So he's neither a practitioner, you know, just going about writing his journal like Mark Curelius or the founder of a school writing things very technically. Um he's trying to summarize. He's doing basically the same project we're trying to do, which is summarize, popularize, u make clear the pros and cons of these schools ways of life. And he has he has a position there um with within that argument. but he is trying to be as charitable as possible. So I it's such a lovely project because it's just it's the project we're doing which is looking back on old texts these texts written hundreds of years before Ciso Cicero was alive and making sense of them and applying them to our own lives but it's a bit more of a of a I don't ac academic process from from Cicero not a not someone like a Senica Epictitus or Marcuselius who are actively practicing. So absolutely recommend it. I think it's a great maybe I'll phrase it this way. I think it's a great second book. Like there's there's this constant theme of people who maybe they read some Ryan Holidayiday, some Masimo, some Donald Robertson, and they they're intimidated to go and read a book of pure philosophy. I think on ends is a great book that it's it's a primary source. It's pure philosophy, but it is still accessible. It's dense, but it is but it is accessible. Well, it's a great book for that category if someone looking to go deeper. >> Yeah, I think so. or perhaps someone who's read one of the classic stoic works and is looking for something similar but is slightly slightly a skew and I and I do like as as you say how Cicero is you sort of read the first chapter on Epicurionism and you start wondering wait am I an Epicurion and then [laughter] you know he start he knocks it down and then you think that's yeah of course Epicurionism is rubbish and then starts arguing for stoicism and then knocks that down in the follow-up chapter. So I think that's uh uh that that speaks speaks well of his understanding of the school and it's a good philosophical practice. So perhaps even if Cicero wasn't a practicing stoic he was uh you know aiming to be a philosopher and in addition to his role as a statesman and orator and uh and it is it's accessible. It's perhaps even more one of the more theoretical works from Cicero, but at the same time, >> he does a good job explaining some of the philosophical technicalities in a rigorous way while mapping those on to ordinary examples from, >> you know, different how different Roman heroes might have exemplified stoicism or serve as counter examples to Epicurionism and so on. So I think he does a good job of sometimes what's called the you know climbing the ladder of abstraction of being able to be fairly abstract uh and theoretical but also noting how the principles are re relevant to life ordinary or at least circumstances his readers would have been familiar with and uh circumstances we can be familiar with today. Yeah, I agree with that. The technical rigor shouldn't be understated. Um, and it it makes me think of uh Julia Nass, who's a contemporary author, contemporary academic, wrote this book called the morality of happiness. And it was one of my favorite books for my PhD. And it [snorts] it's a similar project to what Cisero does where it lays out all the major schools. It says what are their arguments? What are the pros and cons of each? Or what are the strengths and weaknesses of these arguments? you know, what does what do the cynics say versus the um arisatilians and the skeptics and all these kinds of positions. And for me, it's a really valuable work because if you're I guess I'll say this to those listening, you know, if you're interested in ancient Greek philosophy, you might be interested in just in philosophy as a way of life and this might be the first time you've encountered people using philosophy in such a practical manner. You might be interested in udemonistic philosophy. So philosophy that looks at the purpose of life as flourishing uh or the purpose of of ethics as flourishing and um living well and and achieving your ultimate ends. And if if you look at like a vi van diagram of features, I think stoicism has those features, but a lot of these other ancient schools have these features as well. And it's really worthwhile reading and understanding those to either to solidify okay well I actually am a stoic because I've seen the other kind of udemonistic philosophies the other ways of answering these questions and I don't agree with them I agree with the stoic way or maybe you find yourself more an epicurion or a skeptic or an arisatilian um or something along these lines. But I just think um it's worth it's worth going down that journey if you haven't already and if you've just studied stoicism to to broaden that a little bit further. >> Absolutely. I think that's another another good recommendation. >> Cool. What do you got in terms of uh items you want to reflect on either something you wrote read one of our our conversations? >> Well, something I read this year and I don't we didn't actually talk about it but just a year end reflection. Something I read this year was parts of the New Testament, which was my first time actually doing that. I've never read the Bible before. Also, parts of the Old Testament, but it's quite it's quite large. Um, I've never read the Bible before. I've never I've always been kind of hesitant to engage with Christianity because I I have a real like philosophical bend to it and I have a tendency to ask a why a bunch of times or have people to kind of support their arguments. And if people don't approach their religion from a philosophical perspective, I think that's sometimes not like a healthy way to engage in the conversation, it can be like annoying for people. Um, but I kind of engaged in the New Testament as a peer like as a this is a book about how to live written around the same time as Epictitus wrote, as Masonius Rufus wrote, as Marcus Aurelius wrote. And that is a period of time kind of vocabulary kind of way of approaching the world that I'm very familiar with. And so it was interesting to see it was really worthwhile and interesting for me to see how Christianity would fit into that. Somebody you know who's been exposed to stoicism then being exposed to the teachings of Jesus and seeing how those compare um right up against each other. I was also struck a lot in reading the New Testament about how much I well I mean how much I enjoyed it, how much I thought um Jesus is a biblical figure um at least at least what is in the the gospels um is is a pretty compelling ethical picture of how to live and how to be um or at least like some some some ideas that I really really agree with some that are quite stoic especially pushing back against living life for shallow reasons, for doing things to seem impressive, doing things to come off a certain way, memorizing verses or arguments but not putting them into practice, being kind of hypocritical in your judgment of other people but not focusing on your own practice. The a lot of these lines I'm like this is just like Epictitus. Um, I was like, this is so much this is like and the way that Jesus was responding to almost I don't know if it's like a perversion or bastardization. I don't know if that's right. I'm out of my historical wheelhouse here, but he's responding to the way people are treating Judaism and saying, "Oh, you've gotten now you're focused on appearing a certain way or you're focused on, you know, your ability to recite these passages but not your ability to act them out." And it reminded me a lot of Epictitus who's looking at these people who have been now responding to stoicism for hundreds of years and saying ah you've lost like the spirit of it. You've lost the the core message of it and you're now doing it for you're practicing philosophy for status reasons or to appear a certain way. I guess the last summary is that it's if it's not something you're familiar with, it's something you're intimidated by. I thought it was a worthwhile thing to dig into. I thought it was a really interesting text and it's probably one that is like culturally the most significant for our ethics and our western culture whether you're religious or not. So yeah, I really I really enjoyed it and it was nice to place that to to finally have a proper picture of Christian ethics, the kind of pla place in contrast to maybe what stoic ethics offers. >> Yeah, that's really cool. I think uh it's certainly worthwhile project to go through uh the Bible. It does seem like it's one of those I wouldn't say it's a book everyone should read but if you are in any way engaged in the uh if you're western and engaged in a intellectual or cultural type project then you need to read it or something of that sort. You know, not everyone needs to read it, but it's on the list of it's going to be the top list of most uh things people ought to read. And perhaps not the whole thing, of course, is rather large, but at least a gospel or two. uh it it does seep in through so many philosophical >> even uh of course just uh not just at the philosophical level but at the level of the stories we tell many archetypes of course you'll see in the Bible and references and such I think it's uh it's it's it's good to read and it's probably perhaps different if you haven't read it before than you expect is uh I think that's something >> yeah the new Testament at any rate. >> Well, it's a lot or like something like there'll be like the scene where he walks on water and it'll be like one paragraph and you be like, "Oh, we've talked a lot about that, but that is like two sentences, you know, or like um some miracle will happen and then it'll jump to the next scene." It's like uh it's it's just like it's dense, it's quick, it's to the point, it's not fluffy. And so, yeah, that was that was a surprise to me. >> Yeah. That's also sort of interesting because it's at a time when um I mean stoicism and Christianity were competitors and I would it's fair to say Christianity won at least in terms of historical popularity and uh influence. Uh so it's interesting to think about that you know why that was and why that is. Perhaps there's I think it's in Acts when Paul encounters the Stoics and argues against the Stoics argues with the Stoics. I was recently reminded of that by another Stoic conversation guest a few weeks ago. >> Well the one thing that ancient Greek philosophy doesn't have I mean there's a lot of differences between ancient Greek philosophy and religion. Even though philosophy is many of these philosophies have conceptions of God and have arguments for God, but the emphasis also on miracles I thought was really interesting in the Bible. Like ancient Greek philosophy doesn't have ethically excellent people kind of breaking rules in the physical world in the way that I thought that was present in you know Jesus Jesus is this great amazing person. and he's the son of God. And one of the ways that he manifests this or demonstrates this is through his kind of miracles and um turning water into wine or walking on water um curing the sick, rising from the dead. And there's not really any of that. I don't know if there if there is any of that in ancient Greek philosophy. Although in you know in Plato we get conceptions of living into the afterlife, being reborn. the more more philosophy you've done, the more likely you are to be reincarnated in in a you know in a in a better way. So we do have some conceptions of the afterlife, but I think this like capacity to maybe like manipulate the physical world is not is not one that we see. And that's I guess maybe historically interesting because it's not like it's not like the Stoics and the Epicurans and the skeptics were like debating about which miracles were real miracles or arguing against each other uh in that way. Um that's just kind of there seems to be some sort of like type difference there. That that's one reflection I have. >> Yeah, that's certainly true. You don't have the same aspect of the supernatural and you don't have Epicurian Stoics arguing about you know whether Zeno I don't know what kind of miracle a [laughter] stoic even perform whether you know there was a huge commotion in the Agora and Zeno said peace and Zeus you saw lightning bolt and there was peace. So they don't have that sort of thing. Yeah, there's there's so much to talk about and perhaps we should revisit or revisit some of these topics here. Um I I think whenever we do some discussions related to Christianity, I think we often get some positive feedback and also some negative feedback about why we're talking about Christianity as a as a religion. So if you would like to hear more of those conversations and if we're interested in it, I think we've we've talked about doing something like this before. we'll probably do it anyway, but uh you know, send a send us an email if there are any particular questions or angles you want want us to think more about or if you have thoughts really related to to these topics, I think we'd be interested to hear them. Well, and I guess my takeaway for those listening is if you're like me and you're not particularly religious, there is a historical and an ethical value to looking at uh a way of life that is like contemporary to stoicism and kind of comparing and contrasting. That was my takeaway. Um there is really a pretty robust philosophy or picture of a way of life that you can get pretty quickly uh reading the New Testament. And that was that was was worthwhile and I'll definitely return to more parts in the coming years. >> Nice. Something that I've been reading through slowly throughout the year is a book called The Art of Worldly Wisdom by uh Belfasar Gracian. He was a Spanish Jesuit. And it's just a list of apherisms, a paragraph on his view sort of almost like advice to uh someone who would be noble that uh I think maps on to a decent amount of stoicism. It's pra it's sort of practical though it has a slightly different angle and it was it was very influential in its time. It it had a large impact on or at least it was noted by philosophers like um Schopenhau and Nichze and uh I've I've enjoyed leaving through it. It's very short. It's one of those books that's I think very short but one can't read too much of it at a time. And uh you have these different theme different themes of you know acting with courage pursuing knowledge developing yourself and your talents knowing how to interact well with people which sometimes involves a certain amount certain amount of strategy. So I think he's very very interested in sort of court what one might call court politics or we talked about Odicius and Tact the other day or maybe even Adysius and his somewhat tricky ways or rhetorical talents. I think this is a book that would uh suit someone like that very well. So that's something that I've enjoyed leafing through. And I think if you're attracted to the Stoics, the Stoics are of course Laconic. You have Epictitus' handbook, Marcus Aurelius's apherisms, uh, Senica even in in his letters, very apheristic style. You might you might just enjoy leaving through this as well. But first, it's a similar style, a style you'll find recognizable and on similar topics, sort of a vision of living well and some practical ideas on how to do that. >> And that's the art of worldly wisdom. >> Yes, that's the art of worldly wisdom. We had a short sto with some of his rules um that came out. But yeah, it's the art of worldly wisdom by Gracian. >> And what's your give me one or two. >> Yeah. So I was just trying to think what are some good ones to to pick out. I think um [clears throat] this I he talks about fame and fortune a number of times. So we've got um where the one is fickle, the other is enduring. Speaking of fame and fortune, the first for life, the second afterwards, the one against envy, the other against oblivion. Fortune is desired at times assisted. Fame is earned. The desire for fame springs from man's best part. It was and is sister of the giants. It always goes to extremes. horrible monsters or brilliant prodigies. Interesting idea. Not necessarily stoic apart from the emphasis on fortune. And uh there's one we have. Um I think this one's rather stoic. Be spotless. The indispensable condition of perfection. Few live without some weak point either physical or moral which they pamper because they could easily cure it. The keenness of others often regrets to see a slight defect attaching itself to a whole assembly of elevated qualities. And yet a single cloud can hide the whole of the sun. There are likewise patches on a reputation which ill will soon finds out and is continually noticing. The highest skill is to transform them into ornament. So Caesar hid his natural defects with the laurel. It gives you a good picture of the content and the style. >> What does that last one mean? >> So Caesar hid his defects with the laurel. So I here's a let me pull it up again. So there's a there's a sort of initial idea of be spotless perhaps connected to that stoic idea of trying to tame perfection. Really the sage that is perfect. Uh and yet of course there's the move that people regret or people are able to notice lights and whether it's character, appearance, manner and uh are going to notice them and perhaps even will notice them even more for uh people who are relatively clean. If you want to continue the metaphor and the but the perhaps the social insight here is that there's a way of transforming or putting an ornament on a defect perhaps and with appearance is the easiest way to express this idea. But um you have um Caesar hiding his natural defects with the laurel. I think he's talking about him not having that much hair. That's how I interpret that phrase anyway. But he's able to wear that laurel well. And uh I I think maybe you can see this in in fashion where uh they're you know perhaps some people they try to if they're a little uh you know if they're they're suffering they're trying to hold on to their hair a little bit longer than they should and sometimes it would look better if they just let it uh shave their head or something of this this sort. Outside of fashion perhaps there's there are certain there's certain ways of uh you don't want to call them vices but certain uh almost faults can have their charm if they are if they are presented well or if people make clear that they have good intentions and recognize their imperfections and in a way where you see similar faults on other people but because they don't have the same intentions or they aren't able to uh you expressed that well, then it doesn't um it just it just doesn't work as well. So perhaps perhaps there's a that's that's that's my stab at attacking uh or explaining this uh this section. This was be spotless uh number 23. >> Yeah. Cool. Fun. I've never really read like I never read The Art of War or I'm not I never really dug into like an apherism book. Although I guess you could call Marcus's meditations an apherism book. in some in some sense. So maybe I have then um I take it back. But yeah, I like the idea of having something wise to chew on and evocative to chew on. Yeah, I think yeah, it's a good book just to leave through. I think you can read one of these quickly, but there's a decent amount in them either to agree with, disagree with, find an insight, try to make sense of it that it's as as I said, it's good to leave through, you know, five or 10 of them and then you just need to set it down. It's not the sort of thing you can blister through even though it is it is a short book. >> Yeah. >> Cool. What else you got? >> So, one of the uh one of the conversations that I really enjoyed this year was our conversation on the life of Plato. This was a book review of a biography of Plato by Robin Waterfield. But I really like our book reviews, Caleb, because it's like a little book club. Forces me to read something that I want to read but otherwise wouldn't. Uh, but then we put a we put a date in a calendar and then it's like, "Okay, I've got to read this." Um, and I I I liked this one because I really fleshed out to me Plato as a person. I didn't know. I mean, if you go and listen to that episode, you'll hear about he was a rather rich and powerful man that gave him the time and ability to do philosophy. But his life was kind of bookended on either side by these encounters with tyranny and this kind of attempt to solve the question of how to rule the state with philosophy. And he grew up in an Athens that was experiencing and recovering from a rule of tyrants. He saw the tyranny of the people kill Socrates who he admired. And then at the end of his life he had this attempt to you mentor philosophically lead or direct a tyrant and kind of failed. And it's this it's another historic you know we talk a lot about Senica and Nero. We talk a lot about Marcus Aurelius and his son Comeodus, but it's another kind of example of a philosopher and I think more than Senica certainly Plato is a philosopher who spent his life trying to think about the role philosophy had in leading states and the role philosophy had in dealing with tyrants and he kind of tragically um was unable to enact that either through fault of his own or fault of his fault of his character or fault of his philosophy. be really kind of compelling. It's one I think about all the time and I sometimes I just walk around and think and I can't wait for the HBO Socrates Plato series at some point because I think it's just such a compelling story and it's a good reminder to me sometimes as a philosophy person. I come into things uh you know history of ideas first, ideas first and I know for a lot of other people they really resonate with stories, biography, history and it was a good example to me about how history can um enrich your understanding of ideas and philosophy. You seeing how those play out can make certain aspects of them resonate more, stand out more. um really enjoyed talking with you about it and setting that time aside. >> Yeah, as you say, the book clubs are a good way to cover the things we would like to read and then making it actually happen. Like a Botheus is constellations of philosophy. I've wanted to read that for a long time, but just never taken the time to do so. That was another good one we tackled this year. Yeah, >> I' I'd love to watch I think there's an episode of Plato going to Syracuse and Dion and Dionius that uh could make for a good uh good show certainly [laughter] related to some uh court strategy and court politics and this idea of you know the the philosopher and his students aiming to to make their mark on the city state on the polace on the people is an interesting on. >> Cool. >> Yeah. In addition to the podcast, uh we also have um the STOA letter that's on a substack. And I think there's something about something I've been thinking about writing about some on this letter is the Stoics are very good at using analogy, metaphor to communicate the stoic ideas. is I think one of the richest most useful analogies that Stoics use is to sport or athletes. So just so many ways you can understand stoicism and explore stoic training uh with that uh with metaphors grounded in the athletics. I I wrote another piece related to stoic maxims and thinking of them as as magic in a sense which which can be useful perhaps uh for some and I had I had a lot of fun writing that. So like the key idea is just that our our stoic maxims magic well they're just quick ways to sort of shift your attention to what matters and uh change your mind in a in a real sense. So I think that focus perhaps that's that's not a useful metaphor for all but if you think about almost the these maxims ingraining them either in the words of the stoic themselves or in your own words that uh can realize real transformation in a way that you know perhaps can can be usefully compared with magic. So I think that's uh thinking about that and just just in general apart from the metaphor the power that the stoic maxims whether they come from Marcus Senic or Ebictitus have on people or myself personally and why they have that power. I think you know stoic theory has an interesting interesting answer to that question. So that's uh that's something that I wanted to to call out. >> Yeah, I like that. I like that piece. You know, the magic is a bit the magic itself is a metaphor, but the point is like there's something else going on above and beyond the words that it's there more it's more than the sum of its parts. And it's more than just the proposition of the statement. And I think you're right about the we can get into the theory of that, but it's it's about the focus of your attention. It's about the kind of motivational force it has. its ability to direct you on like the most important thing in the situation. And this is the stuff that Epictitita says to keep on hand all the time. Yes, it's it's a good reminder that you can be talking about stoic ideas all the time or you can be talking about philosophy, but there's some better or worse ways to engage in it if you want it to be effective and behavior changing. And maxims are probably one of the most behavior changing things you can do. I think about that in terms of sport as well, like just simple phrases. Maybe your coach says something, you know, even you think about something as simple as like keep your eye on the ball or something. Um, but or uh, you know, keep going until the end of the game, like go until the end of the clock, these kinds of things. Just it's it's a com it's just it's not this three-part argument. It's just a kind of a phrase that just allows you to focus your attention in the moment. Oh yeah, and stoics are great at that like you said. >> Yeah, absolutely. I [clears throat] think having a few of the of course it's a key stoic practice but having it those maxims on hand is uh I think essential and something that you know always trying to think through you know what are what you know what are the tools one's bringing to uh to one's day to one's current moment in life I suppose and just thinking through you know what are my maximums going to be for the next month or what sorts of ideas am I going to remind myself of especially in those moments where you things are maybe are distracted or uh things are starting to get stressful and such, you know, what what can you turn to to shift into a more useful way to approach approach the world? >> Yeah. Great. One thing that I wrote for the STOA letter that I really enjoyed, I don't know if I enjoyed, but I think it was the most helpful, well, sorry, I did enjoy it, but I don't remember the one I enjoyed the most. It's like hard for me to want to play. It's like pulling teeth this one. But I wrote the 10 Stoic exercises. And what I liked about it is it was kind of a moment for me to step back and say, you know, I've actually been doing this for a while. I actually have like I can it's time for me to take a step back and evaluate which parts of these do I actually find helpful because I find doing this podcast part of our mission here is to make stoicism accessible to people and then people engage in stoicism in different ways. So you want to present everything as charitably as possible so people have their opportunities to learn as much as possible. Take what they find valuable, leave what they don't. Like I think about it like when I teach Brazilian jiu-jitsu, I don't just teach my style. I teach all the styles. I teach all the moves so that people, you know, I don't like rubber guard, but if someone else likes rubber guard, I need to be able to show them rubber guard so they can incorporate it into their personality. That's a bit of a specific jiu-jitsu example, but there there's certain techniques I don't like to do. Maybe because they require a lot of flexibility or they require being from a position that I don't like to be in when I'm training, but some people might. And so you need to be openminded about that. And so this was like the opposite. This was me thinking what what actually do I like to focus on? And some things we talk about like we talk about quite often like the view for from above premeditatio meorum momento mori. There's some of these things that I think that like I do like but I I realized taking a step back you know do how often do I actually use these? because this was the exercise. It was like look at 10 stoic exercises and rank them in terms of their importance or their usefulness to me. And it's like I talk about these a lot, but I don't know if I actually use them all that much. Where I compare that with something like the dichotomy of control, um something like the reserve clause, something like the obstacle is the way or um even mindful attention to impressions. Those are things I use all the time. It's part of the fabric of how I navigate situations. So, it was almost like to stretch the jiu-jitsu analogy as far as it can go. It was almost like a moment for me to step back and reflect on what is actually what kind of stoic am I? What kind of brand of these exercises? I think they're all useful, but which which do I actually use? And it was uh it was uh I don't it was it was useful for me to realize guess I'm a bit of like a epic tedan in that sense which I don't find surprising but it's this focus on making good use of impressions focusing on the dichotomy of control recontextualizing things to see how they could be in your benefit. It's a real kind of epictus style which I guess is not that surprising but it was it was it was fun for me to see. >> Yeah. If you haven't had a chance to read that article do check it out. I think it could be uh I mean it's good for me to read just to see how other people use stoic techniques uh especially someone who is wellversed in in both the theory and the practice and uh see what resonates with you and what doesn't. I think that's uh that's that's good to know and I always always enjoy I think it it's good to talk to other people to get a sense of what's working for them because it might work for you as well or if you have the sense that oh every I should be doing this but it's I'm not finding that it's working. It can be useful to know that oh other people you know this exercise doesn't necessarily resonate with and uh you know stoicism is not so dogmatic that there's just some set of exercises or practices that must be adopted by uh you know all stoics. I'm just going to push the martial arts analogy as far as possible. The stoic is about, you know, it's about living well. And so there are different ways of understanding the truth, different angles by which you can come to the same truth, different angles by which you can come to the same realization. And so some are going to work for you, some are aren't. The same way in fighting, there's different ways to defeat your opponent or you don't have to do the same move that worked for Marcus or worked for Epictitus. You can find your kind of your your own path. You also don't want to reinvent the wheel, so to speak, and reinvent your own style on your own. That's just way too much work. So, it's like take take take what you have from the people who came before, but you don't need to copy it. Exactly. >> Mhm. Yeah. I mean, Marcus really did say life is more like wrestling, the dancing. So, we do stick to the martial arts analogies heavily in this podcast. Uh, and perhaps there's something to that to that thought independently. Awesome. Cool. That was fun. Fun to review. Think through some of those things. Remember them? >> Did you have a Did you have a movie that you wanted to do or something? >> Oh, yeah. I totally forgot about movies. I suppose this is a very Epicurian podcast in a way. Just thinking about our memories and returning to >> Oh, these are the things that I enjoyed. The things that brought me pleasure over the year. Yeah. We're not talking about the good things we did cuz we didn't do any. We just watched movies. We like to watch. We read books that made us happy. >> That's right. Oh, what movies? I I suggested movies and >> I have one. >> Okay, go ahead. Let's let's hear it. >> Um I watched the Lord of the Rings for the first time which is surprising. I I never really liked it. I don't know why I didn't like it but I watched it for the first time the whole thing. We watched over like four days all like I was I treated like a miniseries. I think it was like, you know, multiple episodes and I loved this idea of Frodo in spoilers for Lord of the Rings, but Frodo as this hero whose virtue is really his perseverance. His virtue is almost like the absence of bad instead of this like um incredible propensity for you know magnanimous huge acts of courage or charity uh or graciousness. He's just somebody who who kind of lacks these these vices and is able to withstand a lot is able to be very steadfast. Uh, and I thought that was a great model for a hero. I know I'm late to the train or like late to the late to the show or whatever the metaphor is, but it was it was a cool hero. I thought Froto was really cool. I thought the virtue of friendship also as like an ethical tool with Sam and Froto, like the the the I don't know the synergy or the balance of having other people around you that hold you to a high standard and encourage you to be your best. Um, it was a was it was a it was a lovely story and I thought the ethics in it were were great as well. >> Yeah, classic another good classic work. A lot of the firsts uh for you this year perhaps um I thought of one I I thought uh that might be interesting to listeners of this podcast. I saw the movie the um the great beauty by the director Paulo Santino. >> Mhm. >> It's uh not a stoic film. You could think of the protagonist perhaps as an Epicurian bit of a you know artist who have a very successful novel earlier in his life and perhaps is uh trying to recapture [gasps] that success in some way or the the same kind of aesthetic value that he tried to capture in that book. He's trying trying to recapture in his life. But it's an in it's a there's a number of different things in that film, but it is a wonderful beautiful depiction of Rome and has a number of very nice I think scenes of the uh the city both in its its modern presentation but also hearkens back to uh of course the the the you know the statues, relics, and such that color Rome. So for for that reason, it might be might I would I would recommend as as a beautiful film and perhaps not a I wouldn't say it's a stoic film, but it is something that explores themes of mortality. He's an older fellow and uh and art as well in a beautiful place. So there there's something to it. >> Yeah. And so that's the great beauty. I haven't watched that in a while, but that's a that's a 10 out of 10 movie in in my view. Um along with Youth by the same director. I just thought those were beautiful, great movies. I can't remember why I thought that cuz I've seen them about 10 years ago now, but I I did score them on my um IMDb profile and I remember just adoring them as films. So um he's he's he's done a lot of stuff. He did the New Pope, that HBO show as well, but I I thought The Great Beauty and Youth were outstanding films. So, agree with that recommendation. >> Yeah, it's it's a lot of fun, too. I think there's just a really fun dance scene, like probably one of the best dance scenes I ever seen in that movie. And uh a number of good scenes. So, I Yeah, as far as movies go, that's something that I saw this year that really stuck out. >> Yeah. >> All right. That's That's 2025. >> That's 2025. >> Uh thanks for listening all. It's always cool that uh people listen to this podcast. And uh >> yeah, >> I had not to not to pump us up too much, but you know, somebody reached out recently and said, "Hey, this is like this show has genuinely helped me navigate parts of my life." And that's just like I don't know, that's exactly what we do it for. And that feedback is is is really nice to hear, but mostly just like glad that, you know, we're we're in a position to for us to chat and have these conversations that I find personally fulfilling and enjoyable, but are also um interesting and relevant to other people and helping people. So really, really glad to hear that. And as you said, thanks for everyone for listening. >> Awesome. Yeah. Thanks, Michael. Thanks all. Peace.
