---
title: "What Stoics Find in the New Testament (Episode 222)"
slug: what-stoics-find-in-the-new-testament
episode_number: 222
youtube_id: 2kXmK3vzez0
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2kXmK3vzez0
upload_date: 2026-03-10
duration: 54:41
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoa Conversations. My name is Michael Trombllay. I'm Kver and today we are talking about the New Testament. So I wanted to do this episode because we chatted about this a bit in our New Year's episode. I've read parts of the New Testament this year and they were quite impactful. I really enjoyed it. I'm not a religious person. and I've never studied Christianity in any sort of focused capacity, but really enjoyed reading it as a historical piece and as a philosophical piece. And um in this episode, I wanted to focus specifically on the Gospel of Matthew. And the reason for that, for those that don't know, the New Testament, it's broken up into the it opens with these stories of the life of of Jesus Christ from four of his apostles, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. And this is really the the biography, the kind of the birth of Jesus, what he taught, and then his his death and resurrection. And I I think it's a great if if you're only going to read one part, you kind of get a big piece of the story there. And so I thought it was I thought it was some it was the other reason that I wanted to talk about that is it also goes right into you know what Jesus said. It's supposed to be this kind of firstirhand account of his lessons um anecdotes or um examples of things that he did or people he helped or um arguments that he made. And so that's a that's a great insight into Christianity. Um if if we focus on it as a you know as the the following of Christ and and his teachings, we get we get a lots of um examples of Jesus doing things and saying things in these books. Another thing that I wanted to preface with this is that my approach is going to be primarily philosophical. So I'm I'm interested in the thinking of Jesus Christ as a thinker, as an as an ethical thinker. And what was really interesting for me reading this book, Caleb, and I I know you have some I think you have more exposure to Christianity than I do, but I I've spent all my life kind of like well um learning about ancient Greek thought, understanding really deeply ethical schools of thought and ways of life from this exact time period. And so then looking at Jesus as Jesus as a contemporary, as somebody who was going about and teaching and um you know in some of his apostles, they they travel to Athens and they preach to Stoics and Epicurans and this really was a contemporary time period to what we talk about and um so really interested in in um that perspective and that kind of intersection. So people would have been learning about stoicism, they would have been learning about Epicuranism and then they would have been getting this exposure to Christianity. And so how do those match up? So that's that's the approach. Any any thoughts from you? >> Well, I think it's a great topic. It's a huge topic. There are so many different angles we'll be taking. I think the more philosophical ethical one as you said, but of course perhaps we should have followup episodes about maybe more some of the metaphysical issues, you know, Christianity as um a critique of stoicism or and the reverse because of course there are some metaphysical debates that of course we'll touch on but perhaps not get too deep into the weeds. uh and of course there's the historical matter where there's an interaction between the stoics other henistic schools and Christianity and Christianity in a sense wins and there's I think an interesting discussion about why that came about and what that says about both Christianity and the hellenistic schools so but uh I suppose we'll be focusing more on the ethical philosophical aspects today um and I think there. I think there's a lot there. As Michael said, I should say that I was I grew up Christian, but I'm no longer a practicing Christian. Uh so, uh I'm of course a little bit more drawn to the historic picture of things, but I do think there's a number of Christian thinkers. And of course, I do think it's a worthwhile thing for really any Western person to do is read read the Bible along with some of the Greek classics. >> Yeah. And and as a point of a caveat, I'm going to criticize or at least think critically about some of the things that um you know Jesus says or teaches as I've interpreted them in um the Gospel of Matthew. But in in my no, I don't mean I don't mean any offense by that. In my anecdotal experience, every practicing Christian I've met has has has really respected engaging with the thought seriously and taking it seriously and and asking kind of deep questions. Um I just know that approach if you're not used to kind of a philosophical lens um sometimes it can seem abrasive to kind of ask the like well why is that the case or what's the justification for this position or you know I think this position is contradictory. Um, but I I mean all all that as as a um yeah, as as a candid candid exploration of it as a as a school of thought, as a way of thinking, as a way of life, and applying the same lens to it as I would to stoic arguments or cynical arguments or skeptical arguments. >> Great. One thing I wanted to do by way of context is a shout out to Britney Patt and she's a former guest on the show. She's written a course for our Stowa app and she has a new book coming out March 17th, 2026 called Jesus and Stoicism, the Parallel Saints. This is not an endorsement, but I I just it's not it's not a paid endorsement. I haven't read the book yet, but I like Britney's work. I'm sure it will be a thoughtful thoughtful book. And anyone interested in this topic or wants to dig deeper, you know, that's something for you to look into. So with that framework in place, like I said, I'll be looking at the the Gospel of Matthew. So structurally, as I was mentioning, the New Testament opens with four gospels. It's the retelling of Jesus's life by one of four apostles, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Structurally, there's a lot of overlap. And I I was reading a bit about this, and it's on one hand, there should be a lot of overlap because it's the same. Jesus's life is the same, but there's slight variations to the story, slight differences in emphasis between each of them. And so there there that's that's an interesting that's an interesting fact in of itself. And so in in the Gospel of Matthew, we start with Jesus's birth, um his significance as a new prophet and as the son of God. We go through Jesus's life, his teachings, and then it concludes with his death by crucifixion, and then his his ultimate resurrection. And so, I want to focus on those teaching parts, the pieces that I thought were most interesting or stood out to me. There's one or two places where I'm going to call out where it's not from the Gospel of Matthew, but I'll call those out when they come up. Everything else is from there and I'll go I'll go through a series of teachings and then a quote to back it up and we'll parse those as we go. So to kick things off, yeah, one thing that I thought was really interesting is this idea of vice is in desire. It's in what you think or what you what you desire, not in the action itself. I'm used to the epicus where we talk about the chapters. So book 5:es 27 and 28 Jesus says you've heard that it was said you shall not commit adultery but I tell you that anyone who looks at a woman lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his heart. And so this is this notion you presented with this as an ethical school of thought. He's presenting one thing I thought was really interesting. He's he's almost he's explicitly presenting this as like an update to Moses. It's like this is the this is a previous prophet. Moses said a lot of good things, but people are misinterpreting what he taught, misunderstanding what he taught. And so you have this commandment, do not commit adultery. And I'm now placing this emphasis on uh your desire, your lust, your internal life. And so if you if you desire someone else's woman or someone else's wife, you've committed adultery in your heart. That's that's an interesting idea. It also makes me think of stoicism. It makes me think about this idea of mistaken judgments as being the the the vice or the issue in stoicism. Not know it doesn't matter whether you go out and you successfully are adulterous because you could be turned down, you could be unsuccessful in your attempts at adultery, but what matters is that attention uh that intention, that judgment, that desire and stoicism. And I see the parallel here. Yeah. And there's um it's also connected to stoicism because it's demanding. It's not just uh you don't just get off the hook because you know you didn't cheat on your wife. You can't even think about it really, which is a a much higher standard than any external behavior or external markings. Yeah, that is a good point. It's a it's a it's a high level of, you know, you almost think of it I think of it like a floor versus a ceiling. the floor is, you know, you can't go out and commit adultery. Like that's the that's the that is the worst thing you could do. But you're not a great person. You haven't reached this ceiling either unless you've succeeded in not, as you said, not even thinking about it, not even wanting it. It raises this idea. I mean, the Stokes talk about this a lot. It's just about success, right? Like um how should I phrase this? You think about people that aren't bad people just because they don't have the power to be that it's like the ring of Gajis in Plato said well Plato's question is what would you do if you had a ring that turned you invisible and because it was ancient Greece being invisible there's no infrared cameras if you were invisible you could just do whatever you wanted get away with anything um and how many of us don't do things because we don't have the power to do them you know what would we do if we had the power. Um, if we if we had more power, would we change? And I So, I take that your point as being the high standard. It's not just a it's our internal life is maybe a better example of what we would do if we had the power. Um, and then the external life is more about circumstance. It's more about the things outside your control. You know, you don't succeed or you don't go get away with it because of these external situations, but you still wanted to or you still saw the appeal. >> Yep. There's a amusing passage by the sort of cynical satirical writer HL Minkin where he's discussing sexual morality and you know he's a sirical writer but he essentially argues that men in his day didn't cheat on their spouses enough not because they didn't want to cheat on their spouses they did but just because they were cowards right and didn't have the wherewithal to actually follow through on. >> Right. Exactly. It's like >> talking to another person. >> Right. >> Right. Exactly. So, it's not um you know, you don't you don't get any points for that sort of behavior. >> Yeah. If you're if you're a lustful if you're an adulterer who's a coward, you're not better than the adulterer who's not a coward. That person is better than you. Um because they only have one vice and you have two. But if you if you measure it by external, you seem like, oh, that person didn't cheat on his wife and that guy did. Uh I like that point. That's a great point. And so the another related teaching and this is from Matthew book 6 verse 1-4 is so virtue as well is in desire. It's not an action Jesus tells us. So he says be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others to be seen by them. If you do you'll have no reward from your father in heaven. Then he also says so when you give to the needy do not announce it with trumpets as the hypocrites do in their synagogues and on the streets to be honored by others. Truly I tell you, they have received their reward in full. But when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing, so that you your giving may be in secret. Then your father who sees what is done in secret will reward you. You know, I've got a bit of a concept. There's a bit of a conceptual issue here with like, well, is it really for the right reasons? if you're doing it for the reward of God. I'm sure there's some stronger theological arguments for this, but at the very least, Aristotle talks about doing the right thing for the right reason. And Jesus is really emphasizing that you can't go out and um help people because you want to look a certain way, because you want certain status, because you want people to think, "Wow, what a great person this is. If you do that, you'll have no reward from your father in heaven." He says, you know, when you give to the needy, do not announce it with trumpets. Then you think about in today's age we have that that idea of like people on Instagram they film and there's you can have this consequentialist view. So they they they film you know donating money or doing acts of charity. You have this consequentialist view of like well if somebody you know if they're if they are genuinely giving that person money and they're filming it who cares? But then there seems to be this virtue ethic argument of there's something weird about that. There's something unsettling about somebody doing it, doing an act of charity and filming it. And I think that unsettling part is is speaking to this this idea that um you know our virtue is in our desire not and not in our action. And I I think one way of demonstrating that is if you're willing to do it. Uh so if you're willing to do that without being seen, if you're willing to do that um without a reward, I guess I guess I'm not fully qualifying that virtue is just in the desire. there's maybe some degree of success, but it's certainly not in the action by itself. You have to do the action at least for the right reason, I would say. >> Yeah, I think that's right. It perhaps action does matter, but it's not um it needn't be public. And there's there's addition there's this additional point about hypocrisy and being exceptionally wary of hypocrisy and phariseaism which Jesus is certainly concerned about. And it brings to mind, I forget this, don't have the citation off the top of my head, but it brings to mind that line from Marcus Aurelius where he talks about something to the effect of beware about behavior that requires curtains, which is sort of the reverse kind of point where beware of the tendency to want to do specific things in private because perhaps that indicates that it's not such a good idea or a vice where here it's sort of the reverse point, you know, if you're whether or not something should be public or not, don't do good things just because uh you get some public reward or public recognition. >> Yeah. Which the Stoics talk about too, right? I think a lot about Epictitus's quote all the time about if you if you want to show how if you want to practice physical endurance, well, go for a hard run, take a sip of water, and spit it out. So just to like prove that you you know you can survive without water while exercising, but please don't do it in front of anybody and please don't tell anybody. And it's nice to see that same kind of theme coming up here in Jesus's teachings. That idea of that hypocrisy that doing it for the the the right thing for the wrong reason is being insufficient, I think is such a key idea in practice. >> Yeah. Well, I think both the Stoics and Christians want to say your behavior should be robust in different circumstances. And what makes it robust is your desires, your character, right? And so you don't want to be swayed by external rewards or punishments. >> Yeah, that's a good way of putting it. Another teaching I I wanted to call out is turning the other cheek. So in um gospel of Matthew book 5 38-42 Jesus says you have heard it said eye for eye and tooth for tooth. But I tell you do not resist an evil person. If anyone slaps you on the right cheek turn to them the other cheek also. And if anyone wants to sue sue you and take your shirt hand over your coat as well. If anyone forces you to go one mile go with them two miles. give to the one who asks you and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you. And this was funny for me. Maybe you knew this one, Caleb, but I always thought turn the other cheek was like look away or like, you know, don't judge somebody when they do something bad. I never really understood. I never had heard the exact quote before. But this idea of someone slaps you, you turn your face and go, I'm now I'm messing up the audio quality because I'm turning my head side to side to demonstrate this with which no one can see. But um when when you go to um someone slaps you, you literally turn your face and say like, "Look, if you want to keep slapping me, here's the other side of my face. You can have another go." I think that's pretty badass. I think it's very cool. It's very kind of radical in an Epictitan way. It makes me think of, you know, when Epictitus says the dictator says, "I'll cut off your head." And he says, "So well, you know, whoever said I, you know, I wasn't to have my head cut off, right? like if that's what you're going to do, that's what you're going to do. It's it's um well, you just spoke about this idea of robustness of character, and I I haven't used that term before, but this idea of persistent character regardless of the circumstances, and this is an idea of that of like, I'm going to be kind. If someone slaps me, I'm still going to be kind. Instead, most people live like you're going to be nice unless somebody disrespects you or unless you need to have self-defense. That's such a it's such a radical claim and I think that I think that's really cool when it challenges us because I don't how many people do this? Not many. Not many turn the other cheek if if that's the understanding of it which is this this ultimate it's it's it's really is like passivity in a way to external circumstance with a with a sharp focus on internal character and virtue but not an in attempt to intervene or control the external. What what do you what do you take by it? >> Well, I think you're definitely right that it's related to these points about if you're kind, whether or not someone slaps you shouldn't change your kindness, shouldn't impact your character. And I think that's uh that's certainly correct. It's I think see think it's difficult some I think there's also an idea of a clear reading where you could have an anti-revenge reading to this passage. It's an argument against revenge entirely, which is so would be aligned with perhaps even arguments for non-violence, but there are other passages that cut against that. It's of course something that has been debated. But I think it's uh I think it's useful to think of Jesus as really radically overturning a number of different teachings. And this is a great example of that and in particular undermining this idea of an eye for an eye, tooth for a tooth which is so common across uh ancient cultures but modern cultures as well. And uh I think that's I think one of the key key things I take away from that and how I try to understand uh sounds somewhat reductive but I suppose how I try to understand Jesus Jesus's project. >> Yeah. Well and I mean you're situating it he he's explicitly referring to a previous ethical norm and pushing it or challenging it with the reference to the eye for the eye for an eye. And then I also wonder historically if eye for an eye was relatively reasonable like maybe before eye for an eye it was like if you take my eye I kill your entire family and then the eye for the eye was then oh well it's like even it's balance um it's it's proportional revenge and then Jesus updates that with no revenge. Um you don't need anything if somebody takes your eye you know give them your other one. Um, yeah, I um I agree with the the the non-revenge piece is important, but some of these are not also they're not as explicitly revenge, right? You know, if someone makes you go a mile, go with them, too. Give to if somebody asks for you asks something of you, give to them. It's kind of like bending yourself around the will of these other people instead of coming up against it or being this this this hard rock of resistance. Cooler. cooler than I took that passage to be or that expression to be in isolation. Another one that this is actually possibly my favorite. So this is about this idea of loving your enemies and loving your neighbors. So in book 5:es 43 to 48 Jesus says you've heard that it was said love your neighbor and hate your enemy. But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be the that you may be children of your father in heaven. He causes his son to rise on the evil and the good and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that? be perfect therefore as your heavenly father is perfect. And I just I I loved that idea. This is the one that this is probably the teaching that I still think about the most from from what I read is the idea of of you've got to love your enemies because if you love your friends, everybody loves their friends, right? You're not doing anything ethically impressive. You're not challenging yourself. You're not pushing yourself. Everybody's nice to the people they like and then mean to the people they don't like. You need to be nice to the people you don't like. Um it's almost like this if I relate it to stoicism, I would relate it to the intellectualism, which is that the stoic argument that everybody pursues what is good and everybody rejects what is bad. And I I I just love this piece of if you just go about pursuing what's good and avoiding what's bad, you know, you're just doing the same things everybody else, the Stoics would say. you have to like think carefully about what actually is good and actually is bad. And so for Jesus, it's like if you just fall into being nice to the people you like and mean to everyone else, well then you're you're not you're not a good person. You can't stand behind the like I'm kind to my friends. I'm kind to my family. Everybody's kind to their friends and their family if they like them. Um it's again it's a higher standard to go back to that previous point. It's that it's that higher standard. It's that updating of a previous lesson. Um and then one other quote here on this idea of loving your uh loving your neighbors in book 22:37-39 he says love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the first and greatest commandment and the second is like it. Love your neighbor as yourself. And this idea of loving your neighbor as yourself really really reminds me of stoic cosmopolitanism. this uh this appreciation for another person as an equal and the love for another person as as an equal. Yeah. So those were some nice passages about loving your neighbors and being you know loving your enemies too. What are your thoughts? Well, I thought the way you put the first set of verses was very powerful in this idea of loving your enemies and your neighbors equally and well put. The second the second verses we looked at uh you know love your Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. You know this is the first and greatest commandment and the second is love your neighbor as yourself. That does bring up the first commandment of course which gets into um you know these questions about God God's nature which is of course a metaphysical matter which I suppose you can't always uh you can't always dodge. I think at some point you need to reckon with uh you know it's these claims Christianity makes about the world that there is a God and that as such you ought to love him and align with God align yourself with God in some way. And people make similar arguments about stoicism, right? They'll say, you know, the stoics need to think about stoic metaphysics and stoic account of God and align yourself with the stoic god, which of course is a very different character and shape than the Christian one. So that I think that that is always worth flagging because sometimes one can um almost interpret perhaps both Jesus or the Stoics as purely ethical teachers when of course they had views about that extended beyond the ethical worldviews that were uh quite deep and um substantive that uh about issues one one can't just just skip over. Of course. >> Yeah, I'm kind of skipping them here, but >> yeah, which is what we're going to do anyway, but it is worth flagging. >> Yeah, we're kind of like skipping straight to the second commandment. And there's that whole big piece in front of it. Um that that he is explicitly saying is more important than the second pi the second piece. And it get it back it gets back to some of those arguments we were having about stoicism about, you know, do you need that theological piece? Do you need that argument, those arguments around God to ground the ethics? What what do you lose when you lose the stoic god from stoic ethics? And Caleb, I was taking you to just be calling that out here is we can we can talk about this. We can talk about these ethical lessons without reference to the the metaphysical claims or the explicitly religious claims, but but they're there and they're explicitly more important if not grounding the ethical claims. Great. And so another teaching, I'm just kind of calling out my greatest hits here. Something else that he teaches about, this is from the book of John, but I wanted to call it out. It's a very famous anecdote, but one that I hadn't read before. There's a lot of value in going through the New Testament and just seeing all these really famous stories. Oh, that's actually where that comes from because it gets retold so many times. So, this is the casting the first stone story and it's about forgiveness and hypocrisy. So, a little bit of context is um they if I'm remembering correctly, a group of group of towns people bring in a woman accused of adultery and they bring her to Jesus and say, "Well, you should, you know, you should punish her if you're this great religious person and you have this great sense of ethics, right? Shouldn't you shouldn't you dole out the punishment to her? Shouldn't she, you know, be ston like do you will you either stone her? Will you condone her stoning? And so they're asking him. They're asking him about this. And Jesus says, quote, um, but when they persisted in asking him, he straightened up and said to them, "Who is with who is without sin among you? Let him be the first to throw a stone at her." And again he souped down and wrote on the ground. When they heard it, they began to go out one by one, beginning with the older ones, and he was left alone. And the woman where she was in the center of the court, straightening up, Jesus said to her,"Woman, where are they? Do they does no one condemn you?" She said, "No one, Lord." And Jesus said, "I do not condemn you either. Go now and sin no more." And so it it we were talking at the start of this episode, Caleb, about this like really high standard, right? About how there's this really high standard about judging yourself by your thoughts, not even by your actions. And one way to look at that is is almost puritanical, right? Like we're all terrible. If if we're being judged by the standard of desire, we're all failures, right? Like the stoics say, we're all vicious. We're all idiots except for the sage. But here you have this lesson maybe of forgiveness and if not forgiveness at least of hypocrisy and about how being we need to be cautious not to condemn others. Um we need to be aware of our hypocrisy and that's all Jesus is asking them to do is apply a consistent standard to themselves. Right? if you know if we if we're stoning people that have sinned, well, let the person who who hasn't sinned throw the first stone and everybody kind of recognizes, oh, that's a good point. Um, I couldn't pass that test and they all left. And then, but then at the end, you have Jesus who's presumably without sin, I would assume. And he doesn't condemn her either. He doesn't throw a stone either. So, he doesn't apply. It's not like he's saying perfect people stone people. He's the perfect person. He doesn't stone her. He doesn't condemn her. Even there's something about that I find really, I don't know, almost emotionally moving about we can have this ethical project, but we then we don't have to be really judgmental. We don't have to be really judgmental of others. We don't even necessarily have to be judgmental of ourselves. Um and and we shouldn't be hypocrites in terms of holding people at the standards we don't hold ourselves to. What are your thoughts on that? Yeah, it's almost as if there's um you have this picture of ex demandingness that we get. It's exceptionally difficult moral standard set by Jesus. But at the same time there's acceptance of of course love the ability to meet people where they are at while also holding to a high standard and being especially critical of hypocrites. So it's interest I think that's definitely interesting an interesting almost paradox perhaps to wrestle with the Stokes I think have it as well right there's this picture of the sage of perfection that you're always failing to meet up to you're always failing to match and that you know there are real judgments associated with that uh but at the same time there's a focus on there is I think a general weariness of judging others and of course um an ability to set expectations with others and yourself that are realistic and that's comes I think with some that you know that must come with some amount of patience. >> Yeah, I like the way you put that about demandingness but also I don't know acceptance. It's a it's an interesting balance. It's one that I think I would benefit of personally because the temptation there is to give up if acceptance is to give up demandingness and like you know I love myself for who I am and there's nothing wrong with me and so I don't need to try to improve. Everybody just needs to um accept me as I am. So to balance both of those in your head simultaneously it's not an easy challenge but it's probably the correct disposition. You think of it like any other craft or skill like an athlete, right? you have to hold yourself to a high standard, but if you break your tennis racket every time you mess up your serve, you're not going to get your reps in. Um, and so that demandingness and acceptance, yeah, well put, well put and probably the right approach to go about the ethical project. >> Yeah, I think it comes with some amount of emotional satisfaction perhaps. you know, this idea of it's a little abstract. I'll see if I can try to explain this, but this idea that you can um you have this demanding aspiration, but there's some amount of acceptance realism in terms of how well you or others will measure up to it. So there I think there's some amount of solace that can come with that picture while also maintaining uh serious motivation for excellence. But in a way, it's even more difficult. Well, I was just I was just thinking now, you know, if you're in trying to master some craft, maybe you have a gym and uh you're just collecting top performers, you're probably going to cut a lot of the weaker performers and that's going to boost in a way perhaps, you know, the performance of your gym as a whole. You you'll get people training with each other or whatever who are at the same level. They don't need to, you know, waste their time with weaker performers and so on. But in a way I think the call is uh perhaps a challenge from Jesus is to no you want you should do your best with everyone in a way that's not any short he didn't go and spend his time of course with you know the top moral performers top theological performers of course he spent his time with you know the downtrodden social outcasts uh and so on so anyway but I I think there's something there about this project being >> almost in a way even more difficult than sort of standard pursuits of standard ways to pursue excellence might be uh described as well it's almost like an epicurian picture right um maybe I'll I'll contextualize that a bit if we take the craft analogy to an extreme it's like what do people do they go away to camp they surround themselves with other experts in the craft they um go the school on the topic and they train with with an expert teacher in kind of isolation. But the ethical project has this ironic point where you it can't so that that's the traditional craft model. But then ethics you can't be the best person. You don't want to be the best person at the school at the academy. You want to be the best person surrounding yourself wii with normal people engaging with normal people engaging with challenging people. And so it's like you almost have to learn how to play tennis. It's not the best tennis in isolation. It's like you have to play great tennis with really bad people who can't even serve or something like this. And you have to learn how to play with that in those scenarios. And the craft analogy breaks down a little bit, but I'm trying to get this point that you're you're doing it with people who are terrible at it. And in handling those situations well, that's the demonstration of the skill. And that's kind of unique because in most other crafts you get you you become surrounded by other people who are really good at their craft. Um and that's the way you measure excellence. That's what I was taking from what you're saying. I thought that >> that's Yeah, go ahead. Yeah, that's well put. That's um yeah, that helps fleshes out what I was trying to get at. Just think about how Senica advises you to choose friends carefully and so on. In a way, this almost cuts against that advice. It's maybe there's, you know, different points in life where that advice is more applicable. But if you're, you know, aiming to choose friends because that's going to choose good people to be your friends because that's going to shape your character, that does say something about your character, perhaps be more malleable than it should be. Or, you know, of course, a sage is able to be friends with anyone and remain the sage. I think that would be more um sagelike, more Christlike, what have you. Last teaching I wanted to hit on is the danger of focusing on appearances. We've talked about this a little bit, these themes of hypocrisy. They're all over the place, and I love them. They're really great lessons. I think we should emphasize it more in modern society. We've kind of lost this. So, this is Matthew uh book 23:es 2-8. And it goes, "The teachers of religious law and the Pharisees are the official interpreters of the law of Moses. So practice and obey whatever they tell you, but don't follow their example, for they don't practice what they teach." They crush people with unbearable religious demands and never lift a finger to ease the burden. Everything they do is for show. On their arms, they wear extra wide prayer boxes with scripture verses inside. And they wear robes with extra long tassels. And they love to sit at the head of the table at banquetss and in the seats of honor in the synagogues. They love to receive respectful greetings as they walk in the marketplaces and to be called rabbi. Don't let anyone call you rabbi, for you only have one teacher, and all of you are equal as brothers and sisters. I love it. I it reminds me of Epictitus telling his students, you know, the one student can interpret Chrysopus or read Chrysopus the best and he's like, "You're an idiot. I I I don't care how well you can interpret Chrysopus. I care about how you act." And so you have these people, these religious authorities walking around and they um you know they they they have this these lavish outfits and they sit in these important positions of power at the heads of the table. Um but there there's this uh this vanity there, this this pursuit of power there. Um you know, don't follow their examples. is is what Jesus is saying. And I I love that. It's just always keep your eye on the prize, what you're really after. Something stoicism teaches a lot. And um I don't think I don't see how you could be engaged in any sort of ethical project and not encounter what Jesus is calling out here, which is people who are, you know, confusing the rewards or the appearance or the accolades with the actual pursuit itself. And to to reenter our attention on that is is very very important. And I I'm glad to see um Jesus call that out here. >> Yeah. So much of the gospels is Jesus just dunking on these Pharisees. Really? That and driving out demons. I I love it. I'm here for it. Um so those were the teachings that that stood out to me. We talked about the danger focusing on appearances, forgiveness. We've kind of reframed that as like high demand, high acceptance. this idea of loving your enemies because if you love your friends, you're just the same as everybody else. It doesn't make you special. Turning the other cheek, that that anti- vengeance idea, but also this radical kind of kindness or openness to other people. And then this idea, this part of this high demand is being that vice and virtue is in well, vice is in your desire, not in your action. You know, if you're if you're an adulterer and a coward and so you don't you never cheat, that doesn't make you a better person than someone who's just an adulterer. It's about it's about your character. And then for virtue, there's this idea of, you know, the right action has to have the right reason. If you if you help people to be seen or to appear a certain way, that's no good. Um you're you're you're not actually acting properly. And so with with those in mind, I wanted to do with I wanted to turn to points that didn't make sense to me or kind of stood out to me. I don't know if I want to call them criticisms, but just things that jump out to me uh as a stoic. this doesn't really make sense to me or I don't find it philosophically coherent. Um, so to jump into those, first one is is just Jesus performs miracles, walking on water, turning water into wine, healing the sick. I just don't understand the ethical function of these. I don't understand what they prove, what the point is ethically. It goes against to me this idea of I mean maybe maybe it it is that idea that you have to do the right thing for the right reason and that if you're doing it for the right reason it's better to be more powerful. It's there is a kind of consequentialist piece if if you if you have the ability to do it. I just don't care. For me, the the I I have that stoic idea of like, you know, the the the sage who's a poor person with no power is just as great as the sage who's an emperor. Uh so it's like I don't doesn't really matter to me if Jesus has powers. Like they're not that's not really compelling in any sense. Um that's piece number one. Obviously, there's there's this kind of metaphysical piece of proving that he's divine, but yeah, it's not it's not ethically interesting to me. I don't think it makes him better than other people. Um, what do you think about that? >> Well, that's certainly the stoic view, so well captured. >> Yeah, I just like, you know, I just I don't know. Like I think those lessons would be just as good if you couldn't turn water into wine or you couldn't heal the sick. I mean, it's cool that you can heal the sick, but um I don't see the I don't see the benefit to that ethically. I mean, please do it if you can't. Um the other part that that stands out to me is that Jesus's teachings are based in faith. Like there's a lot of if you just believe a lot of discussion around um the almost the ethical importance, so the obligation of faith. So here's a quote. Matthew book 11 22- 24. Jesus says, "Have faith in God. Truly I tell you, if anyone says to this mountain, go throw yourself into the sea and does not doubt in their heart, but believes that what they say will happen, it will be done." Therefore, I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, believe that you have received it, and it will be yours. And so maybe this is where this idea of moving mountains comes from, but he's literally saying that you will move a mountain if you believe enough. Your lack of belief is the lack of movement in the in the the mountain does not move because of your lack of faith. And I don't understand I don't understand the ethical function of faith. I don't understand judging people. There's a lot of passages in in the New Testament where somebody says, "I believe you're the I believe you're the son of God." Or, "I believe in in you, Jesus, and your teachings." and then they're somehow rewarded, their sickness is healed or they're promised something. And for me, I I I it's very kind of confusing to me from a stoic background where you're supposed to have knowledge, which are these logical arguments in support of something. And the issue to not having knowledge is that, you know, you don't understand the world as it is. But believing the right thing because of faith or because of a leap in logic is not any better. You have the right proposition, but you don't have the right reason for it. And so all these kinds of appeals to faith, they don't it it really strikes a strange chord with me. I don't understand what to think about it. That's a big question. But you know, what do you think about faith? Well, it is a big question, but perhaps one way to make faith a little more uh appealing is to map it onto the idea of weak versus strong belief from Epcotus, which it's not so much believing something for no reason, but you know, these people are surrounded by Jesus. They have beliefs about him being the son of God. And faith is sort of a challenge to turn your weak belief into a strong belief. You know, it should be a strong belief, but it's not because you are afraid of looking silly or you're afraid of taking a risk on what you know is true. Perhaps you can see this best with the Noah story story in the Old Testament where of course Noah is told to build an ark because a flood will come and everyone thinks that's silly. You know, if you there's a modern there's this modern picture about I forget what it's called. I think it's got a with Jim Carrey in it. Is Jim Carrey in this movie where >> Yeah. Bruce Bruce Almighty. >> Yeah, Bruce Almighty. This is the first this is the first Jim Carrey reference of the podcast where we are here. >> Anyway, I think that's sort of what uh quintessential picture of faith where you're told to to do something by God and it is reality, but it'd be you, you know, you're sort of called to have a strong belief and act on it even when you're going to be punished socially for doing so or even when uh you know, there are other parts of you that really don't want to acknowledge the truth because of what what it would mean. So, I think that's a kind of uh kind of defense of faith. >> I think there's some like I think there's some language confusion because I don't know that that's always what people mean by faith when they say it, but the way that I've been interpreting faith is this idea of believe this thing that you don't have evidence for. Not some people do mean it that way. But you've presented this other picture which is faith is act in accordance with what you know to be true. You know don't don't deviate from something you have good reason to believe because of other desires or fears or you know corruptions or temptations or something like this. Um that to me is compelling. I don't know if it's always used that way but I I like that idea and I'm sure it's used in both ways. Yeah, it's definitely not always used that way and there are certainly arguments both in terms of Christians through history using it in a different manner but also certainly arguments against uh >> well the picture of faith faith I just presented in terms of a you know an interpretation of what Jesus is actually saying but it is I think it is one reading that's at least uh up there >> your interpretation also helps us make better sense of those parts in the passage like I can't remember who talks to mo uh talks to Noah but you know Is it God himself or an angel? And it's like these there's these weird passages of like why is this person having a crisis of faith when they have literally talked to an angel or they've literally got a message from God and the crisis of faith becomes I have to then follow through on that or I have to act that out. um as opposed to oh do I actually believe it or not which is your interpretation your framing makes more sense for those kinds of stories definitely. Um another piece that I struggle with as a stoic is this promise of external rewards. So, Matthew book 19 28-29 it goes Jesus said to them truly I tell you at the renewal of all things when the Son of Man sits on his glorious throne you who have followed me will also sit on 12 thrones judging the 12 tribes of Israel and everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or fields for my sake will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit eternal life. Um there's other passages, there's other parts at the top, you know, I was talking about this idea of, you know, do the right things for the right reason. And Jesus is saying, you know, um be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others or to be seen by them. If you do that, you'll have no reward from your father in heaven. And you know what is the right so we talked about doing the right thing for the right reason. And what is the right reason? And if the right reason is getting your reward, if the right the right reason is pleasure, that doesn't seem like it can be the right reason. And if it is, doesn't that just make Christianity this kind of like hedonistic picture? Like you're you're just doing it because you're going to get what you want. You're going to satisfy your desires. It's just this delayed gratification. you know, you you have to be nice now so you can get a hundred times what you 100 times what you gave up in heaven. And that could be the picture like some, you know, like I saying, the Epicurans have that argument that like the goal of life is pleasure, trying to maximize pleasure over your lifetime. And maybe you can kind of make that calculus or that wager, but it seems to me to be this total deviation from the kind of virtue ethic sense I had previously of Christian teachings. It's really hard for me to to reconcile that. Um, what are your thoughts? >> No, I think you're right that it's hard to reconcile. It's easy. I think a natural reading of Jesus as a figure is that he's a Jewish apocalyptic prophet and that he's talking about the end times and they're coming soon. And that in a way that suggests that's another reason to be a good Christian. And and that's just uh it does cut against this picture of virtue is purely internal because now there's an external fact you know the kingdom of heaven is coming soon that seems to uh you know promise reward for our good behavior or punishments for bad behavior. So I think there there just is that tension. There's a nice short story by um Ted Chang called Hell is the absence of God on this point uh which I'd certainly recommend if you're interested in in science fiction or exploring this this idea more deeply. It's uh sort of explores this picture and of if you want to take the internal motivation to be Christian seriously all the way you know what what what do you end up with? It's uh I won't won't give any spoilers or say too much else about it, but I certainly recommend it if you're interested in this scene. >> Yeah, I'm a big big uh Ted Chang fan. He wrote I mean for those seems like you you you read him as well, but for those that are listening um he wrote the story that inspired uh Arrival um the the movie which is also in the same book story of stories of your life and others. that short story, Hell is the absence of God, is in that one. Um, and I think his short stories are amazing, so I would also recommend it. I can't actually remember that one, but I'm maybe if I if I read it quickly, I have read it. Um, but yeah, his books are great. >> Nice. Yeah, we've never talked about that at all, but yeah, I'm a Ted Chang fan as well. >> Great. I mean, what I was taking from you there is just like, yeah, that's a problem. Okay. I don't know what to do with that. >> Yeah. I mean, maybe we'll have to have to get a theologian on here or something and and grow them with these these questions. Um, so I mean, I'll wrap things up. In conclusion, I went over some of the things that stood out to me from reading um the Gospel of Matthew. Um, as you said, Caleb, earlier, I think everyone in the Western world or interested in Western culture should take the time to read at least one of the gospels. It was really quick, um, enjoyable. Um, and I think Christianity is just so culturally influential, um, anywhere in the world, but it's valuable. And then as an ancient philosopher, I just like going back to the primary sources. I think if you're interested in stoicism, you should be reading Epictitus, Marcus Aurelius, Senica, um, should be read reading some of the classics. And so if you're interested in Christianity, just going right back to the source for me, it was very intimidating kind of you think, "Wow, this is such a big topic. This is such a big book, but but was was um you know, an enjoyable an enjoyable read as well because it's also written to be accessible, right? And written to communicate the idea as well. So I'd recommend it to anyone who hasn't. um you get through it pretty quick and it's it it's been changed changed the way I think about the teachings of um Jesus Christ as as a um as an ethical school. Not sure if it solved any of the kind of religious questions for me or theological questions for me. And I'm not sure if it was like if there was much compelling argument at least in in um the the gospels to believe, you know, if you if you didn't believe or don't have faith, but as an ethical system, uh you get a really clear presentation, clear and compelling presentation there. >> Awesome. Yep. Well done. >> Cool. Thank you. >> Well, thanks, Michael. Peace.
