---
title: "When Being Good at Your Job Makes You a Bad Person (Episode 193)"
slug: when-being-good-at-your-job-makes-you-a-bad-person
episode_number: 193
youtube_id: 4yQWREJfpkM
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4yQWREJfpkM
upload_date: 2025-07-22
duration: 54:16
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stowa Conversations. My name is Caleb Bontiveros. >> And I'm Michael Tromblé. >> And today we're going to be talking about role ethics versus virtue ethics. and not so much in terms of uh an objection to stoicism or anything of that sort, but just as a matter of wrestling with a particular issue that I think comes up with thinking about role ethics as a guide to decision making. Um, and uh, just just to set that up, you know, there's I think a common objection to role ethics is that there's a difficulty of knowing what to do when your roles clash against one another. You know, you've got maybe duties as an employee versus a friendship or duties of a family member versus duties of a citizen that might come up in particular situations. And the Stoics did provide a hierarchy of roles to address that. But there's another issue that I want to wrestle with in this episode, which is this idea that some roles like in their nature just are opposed to virtues, the classical virtues. Um, so that that's what we'll be tackling and thinking through in this episode. And uh I think it's I think it'll be useful both for clarifying what's the nature of role ethics, what's the nature of virtue ethics, and then perhaps thinking through some concrete examples that might come up in uh your life or someone else's. >> Yeah, looking forward to it. We've done an episode on stoic world ethics. Um so people can listen to that if you if you want a kind of a foundation. But I see this episode as maybe a consequence of taking that view seriously. So you get this question, what does stoicism actually tell me to do? How should I actually act and live? And the Stoics respond, well, you should look to your roles. You should look to, you know, are you a citizen, a brother, a sister, a father, um a mother. What what kind of relationships have has the world given you? Have you chosen for yourself? and how do you live up to those and do those excellently and that sounds all fine and good when you you know if you're a parent or something like this but I mean as we'll get into sometimes those roles expect you to do other things and then that's the kind of question is like what do you what do you do in those cases yeah I mean you'll we'll get into it but I'm I'm curious to see I just see as okay we're taking role ethics seriously how do we resolve this little conundrum that comes up that some roles seem to be not about being a good person they seem to be about just achieving something else I guess. >> Yeah, absolutely. And some of those cases are are pretty easy. You know, there's the role of being a bank robber or, you know, role of being a tyrant and it's pretty easy for people to, you know, taking royal ethics seriously to dismiss that. But, uh, we'll get into some other roles that might be uh a little trickier to think through. So I'll format we'll format this discussion try to I'll bring out the issue with a stark um ancient example if you will thinking about Mchavelli a little bit more extreme but I think brings out the issue well and then move to some more modern type rules where we might see this issue and then we'll be thinking through possible solutions or ways to think through this issue. Cool. Sound good to you? >> Yeah let's do it. All right. So, Makavelli famously wrote the prince which is sort of a a handbook for rulers and it's uh written during a very hectic period in Italian history and it's very controversial. I think Mchaveli he's one of these figures like many philosophical figures who gets caricatured and uh of course we have this term now Mchavelian to sort of denote cynical purely egoistic strategizing which there's some truth to but of course like many of those terms that enter the common parlance as it were is also a bit of a caricature but I think he he he's uh I was reading the prince the other day and I think he brings brings out this issue very clearly. And in particular, he sort of challenges the or at least one of the classical ideas, ideals of political leadership, which sees it as consistent with virtue. You know, the excellent ruler is the virtuous one. and he pushes back on this and he thinks no there's the excellent the virtue and being a good prince being a good political leader are not necessarily aligned so I think that that's the way to see this issue and clearly where you have the role being a good political leader being an excellent political leader and the thought that that's not always aligned with being virtuous So in particular argues that to some amount cruelty can be used well if you're a political leader deception is necessary and uh just I'll just read some lines from him so you can get a sense of his view his writing. So he's talking about acquiring new provinces. Anyone who acquires these lands and wishes to hold on to them must keep two things in mind. First that the family line of the old prince must be wiped out. second that neither their laws nor their taxes be altered. And that that's uh you could see that sort of as um you know this is instructions for maintaining your power through violence which in some sense of course it is but he's also concerned about political stability and longer term peace at the cost of cruelty at the moment. There's some uh there's actually an ancient Roman stoic example of this where you have the stoic Aras Ditimus who was an adviser to Augustus. He advised Augustus to kill one of Caesar's son, his son with Cleopatra, Cesarian, who was a young boy at the time, really following this kind of Mchavelian reasoning that it's not too good to have too many Caesars. So that's one example. I think the clearest example is this idea of cruelty as really a good-m property of a political leader. On that line, he says, "Those cruelties are wellused, if it is permitted to speak well of evil, that are carried out in a single stroke, done out of necessity to protect oneself, and then are not continued, but are instead converted into the greatest possible benefits for the subjects. Those cruelties are badly used that although few at the outset, increase with the passing of time instead of disappearing." So that's an interesting line. You know, Maki Valley has this heristic about if you're going to be cruel, if you're going to be violent, if you're going to dole out punishment if it were to your enemies, you should do it extremely all at once. Um, sort of an interesting strategic idea, but more importantly for our purposes here, if you think about know what's the function of a ruler to create a polity that lasts and even mentions here, do things that are that benefit your subjects. Well, that's it. that is on his view different from being virtuous. So I wanted to start with this example first because it's what prompted me thinking about this issue and also just because it's uh even if maybe it it it doesn't resonate right away because of the different circumstances Maki Valley found himself in the people he's advising found themselves in. It does in a philosophical sense bring out the issue really nicely. you know, Maki Valley is challenging this idea that an excellent political leader is virtuous in the classical sense. So, do you have any any quick reactions to that? >> Yeah. Do you um I haven't actually read The Prince. Do you read that as being literal? Like I I've I think I remember some people talking about maybe it's like a satire or like a veiled criticism. Do you read Mchaveli as being literal? Just out of curiosity doesn't change the argument. >> It's hard to say. It's a little bit easier to dive into particular points. I think there's certainly some cases where you might need to read in between the lines with uh Mchavelli. He's one of those types of thinkers. But in general, I would say yeah, he's a I would read him literally here. But some of the quick readings people have about him being you know say completely opposed to virtue and justify the means this sort of thing uh is a mistake. And uh it's also noteworthy that he did write something else called the discourses which is about discourses on Libby the Roman historian Libby which is about how to run a good republic which is interesting in this conversation between because in that book he sounds a lot more friendly to modern ears. you know, he's not talking about wiping out your enemy enemy families and so on. And that's I think because he does have this view that if you're a prince then that means you you know the circumstances are quite different from living in a republic and being a citizen of a republic or trying to create a republic. So yeah, maybe that's a little bit of an indirect answer to the question, but uh he's he's interesting thinker in general. literal but you do need to take the whole picture of uh of Makave Valley and he is clear that in the prince he's just talking about this specific situation and it's not a grand theory of you know anyone ought to become you know live like this a kind of egoistic >> these days we'd say mockian type picture so >> yeah well I mean I understand the tension I I think you'll have some answers to it later on or some potential resolutions but I think you did a good job laying the tension. I'm a little bit curious why there's this type difference with the bank robber because, you know, you're the star. You're a bit dismissive of, you know, the bank robber or the serial killer. It really does just seem to me this the idea that, you know, to be good at doing certain things, there's all these different kinds of roles we can take on or pursuits or crafts, I think, as the Stoics might say. And, you know, stoicism is the craft of living holistically. But if you take on this craft of being a prince, well, pursuing at that craft is not the same as being a good person. They have different ends. And yes, so then attention attention arises, but it seems to me like that that that's the way that I'm thinking about it is just like some crafts I think about this in terms of like, you know, fighting or business. I'm sure we're going to go through examples. There's just sometimes characteristics where it's like, oh, it'd be better to not be empathetic, for example, or it would be better to be a little bit more aggressive or vicious. If I was building somebody in a system, if I was maybe hiring somebody into this role, I wouldn't necessarily select for the best person. I'm not selecting for the best person. I'm selecting for the best prince or the best fighter or the best um, you know, CEO. >> And those are just different crafts. the same way. Yeah, running is a different craft than carpentry and so on and so forth. I mean, the Stoics might have some sort of answer here about, you know, living well is the ultimate craft and so everything is like contained over it, but contained under it, but that seems to me only just to be an argument for why we should pursue that craft. Yeah, these are just other ones. That's that's what I see the tension to be. And then if you're not fully bought into stoicism and you have this craft or philosophy yet and you you've got this other craft and then then there's this tension about well do I abandon it? You know, do I not become a good prince? Do I become a good prince and forsake philosophy? Is there a way to be a good prince and a good philosopher? That maybe those are the questions that come out. But yeah, I see the tension really clearly. That was a good example. >> Yeah, I think so. And I think you're pointing at different ways to solve the the tension and it's it's really Yeah, it's I suppose it's a conflict between how we initially see a given role or a conflict between how we see a role and our initial conception of virtue. And to resolve that conflict, we could do two things. I suppose we could say in this case malian political leadership just is unjust. You know, on reflection, that's just sort of the solution. And in that way we just sort of bucket it into the you know it's being a prince being a bank robber uh what have you those are just bad roles essentially not roles we should take up not crafts we should practice or but the other solution is that I think is some is on the table especially as we start talking about some of these other modern uh examples is that our initial conception of justice might just be mistaken and I suppose that's you know that's the uh that that I think that's that's what what's worth wrestling with in in these questions. >> Yeah. And then I guess there's maybe a third approach. I mean, we'll get into it. I know you've got you've got a you've got some notes, but there's maybe a third approach, which is that, you know, I've kind of framed as the craft of a prince is in conflict with the craft of a being a good person. But maybe just Machaveli's portrayal of a prince. You know, I'm sure the tyrant says, every tyrant goes, well, this is what you need to rule well. And then Marcus Aurelius comes up and goes, "No, you can actually rule differently." And so maybe there's this kind of false dichotomy created if you limit your conception of what's possible in in that rule. Um, but yeah, let's let's keep going. >> Cool. So that's a classic example, I suppose, to set up the issue. Some modern ones I can think through. I'm curious if you thought of some some other ones as well, Michael. But I think some modern examples where this might come up is and there's a nice tie to Maki Valley here is with political activism. So if you're an activist seeking to obtain a political goal perhaps doing so might be in conflict with ordinary virtues of justice like you know we've talked about we have this this episode on the subcomponents of justice kindness fair dealing good fellowship. You know, if you really want to get something done uh in a state, then maybe you you're not going to mind using tools of deception, cruelty is not not going to look like it did in on Makavei's day. But, uh, you know, you might be happy to make someone a scapegoat, go after them if that's, you know, what riles people up on your side. And perhaps you even have a a just cause you're fighting for and doing so is effective. So that's uh that's uh one case and in defense of this sort of of CA case is easier to think about an activist who's pursuing a cause you in fact think is just but perhaps that you know the means for doing so can be corrupting or they seem to violate these subcomponents of justice. We also see it in in the workplace. You know, there's this idea of, you know, if you're a boss, a founder, or a manager, how important is it to drive these company goals, these marketplace goals versus, you know, relationships with employees, relationships with competitors, you know, ideas of uh a corporate takeover, firing employees for market efficiency, you know, these sorts of circumstances. Um and then finally another interesting case perhaps is just this case of some roles might require sort of pure impartial observation. So there's you know classic examples of journalists or photographers who their role is to photograph a tragedy without intervening without interfering. um whether it's you know taking photographs of a starving child without feeding them or perhaps even in some nature documentaries you know recording a dying animal not helping with their suffering or and some philosophers have also argued this is what philosophy should be like they they reject that idea that you know philosophers should change the world not just describe it they they hold you know the role of philosopher is to describe the world to describe reality as it is without adding these elements of political activism to philosophy itself. So I think that's a interesting case contrast with a activist role I mentioned earlier but uh yeah so these these are a few where you have these ideas of roles activists pursuing a just cause uh let's just to say capable boss if you will doing their part to obtain their market goals and impartial observer. So all of those maybe can be excellent in some respects but come at the cost of uh or come at the apparent apparently come into conflict with some norms of justice and in that way role ethics in some of these modern cases seems to if you think you know the description of these roles is accurate can come into conflict with how we normally see virtue. >> Yeah, I think these are good examples. I think that it works best because you can imagine anybody just being bad, right? You can imagine a teacher being a bad teacher, a boss being a bad boss. And that's not really a conflict. It's just somebody kind of being bad at what they do. So I think the example works best when you think when when it seems to both of us that the best version of this person has to do unstoic things or unverirtuous things um to be the best vers version of that thing. I think the activist that maybe applies at least under one conception the kind of more pragmatic activist Mhm. >> Um same with the boss under one conception like certainly if people view it as like maximizing shareholder value or profit which I think many bosses function under this I think many CEOs certainly do where they view the best version of themselves as being something that is just it's not a question of human excellence. It's not a question of individual excellence. this question of like fulfilling this role or this piece within a broader company which you know just like any other almost view themselves as like a tool right and any the tool has a certain point and if you're not going to do it we'll replace it with some with another tool I was also thinking about this in terms of like another example I was thinking of was soldiers or police officers people who you think you know and people might disagree with this but maybe the best version of the soldier is one who follows orders Maybe the best version of the police officer is the one who kind of enacts the law as it's currently written. And doesn't question if that law is just or doesn't question really, you know, their position in society or whether they're contributing to the good or the bad. It's like I'm here basically to act as an agent of either military leadership or um you know the state and I'm being a bad police officer. and being a bad soldier if I start inserting myself and questions of my personal development and questions of my personal value into these things. So that's another example that comes to mind. Somebody's like, you know, your function is to enact these orders and you can you can practice your discretion, your virtue, your excellence within how you choose to enact them, right? Like the soldier practices courage in enacting the orders. they practice wisdom in making the decisions to enact the order but not that kind of questioning and so yeah so those are the other examples that come to my mind >> yeah that's those are those are good cases I suppose you can also think in the legal context you know being a good judge >> or lawyer >> defense like the defense attorneys defending the guilty people >> there's there's another case I neglected to write down I suppose which is the artist as well we've talked about this >> a little bit where perhaps in, you know, pursuit of their craft, obsession, especially think about great artists, they fall short in other roles. Sometimes it's difficult to capture this problem correctly because you can think about, you know, the the great artists, they're not it's not really a conflict between them and justice. they've just decided to become obsessed with their craft and are not taking up the the uh mantle of, you know, being a good parent, being a good citizen, what have you. But but maybe there are also cases where if you just think about what it is to be a a good artist, that involves just as a matter of your attention, your focus, not spending as much time on being a balanced person. And that does perhaps come at some costs of you know virtues of moderation or again some amount of sociability. So so per perhaps that's another another case. >> Yeah I do think you rais a good example though. I mean I think it's a good case but I think that's I think that's an interesting guard rail as well. So, I introduced the one we we want stuff where we think of the best person being in conflict and then like I said, you don't want to just think of a just because artists can be bad people. That's not the same thing. They're just focusing on one craft and they're neglecting the craft of being a person. But that we're interested in cases where it seems like you cannot be a good person or at least you can't be a good per, you know, you can't exercise the stoic virtues holistically and still be excellent in that craft. It's like where they seem can't you can't you can't both be the prince pragmatically torturing and hanging people from crosses to instill fear in the community and a stoic or maybe maybe you can and we'll get to that argument but but we want to look for where they seem to be necessarily at conflict. >> Yeah, that's right. That's a good reminder. You I suppose what's common to all of these is there's some overarching purpose to the role. >> Yeah, that's just different. It's just different from, you know, achieving one of these these cardinal virtues or any other virtue. And you do want to think about someone who's not using, you know, that idea of being a good boss in order to be a being an or what have you. No, someone who's actually doing their best. And there's a question >> when it comes to Oh, go ahead. I was just thinking um you know Aristotle makes this argument in the Nicameckian ethics that if you ask anybody why they're doing something long enough they get down to this answer of like well because I think that's what a good life is or because I think that will is what will make me happy. And this is like one of those this is one of those objections to that argument is that maybe there's some people who just go oh because I want to make great paintings. And it's like why? Because you think it would make you happy? Oh no I'm miserable. because you think it's like the best life to live. I don't really care about those kinds of questions. Like I just I'm aiming at being a great artist or I'm aiming at being a great prince or you know I don't care about me being happy. I don't care about me making a good life. I want to do my activism and achieve this political goal. >> And so one question I guess we need to explore is are these are these roles just people who have decided not to live udeonistically, right? Like what the Stokes would say is that everybody's aiming at happiness and some people are making mistakes. Oh, you think you'll be happy if you become a lawyer. Uh but and just like focus on becoming the best prosecutor you can be, but that's actually not the route to happiness. But then there's this kind of counterargument about like no, I'm not aiming at happiness. I'm playing a different game. I have this kind of different ends. And I I the the Stoics or any sort of ancient Greek philosophy is is not going to have much to say to that. I don't think because they're playing a different game other than like you're making a mistake, you know. I don't think I think that's a worse game to play. But I think that it's an interesting thought how we're constantly in that framework of like, okay, everybody's aiming at happiness, so what now? But, you know, yeah, I don't know. Is the CEO aiming at happiness? Does the CEO of a big company think this is like the best way to live? Maybe, maybe not. But if they don't, you know, what grounds do you have to argue against that if they're not playing the game, basically? >> Yeah. Yeah, that's a that's a great point. You know, the the stoic move there is to just say, you know, you're playing the wrong game if that's all you care about. And uh and and they have their arguments for thinking that. And but perhaps there's also just this idea that if you find if you're thinking if you are tempted if you're if you're interested in virtue to begin with and maybe seeing some conflict arising here then this tension is going to be a little bit more is going to be more live for you if you if you want to >> if you want to you know I don't I don't know what the goal is be excellent in your craft work in a good company you're noticing these tensions arrive ing then and you and you do care about virtue then it's just a question okay is did I make a mistake in choosing my craft or how I've formulated my craft or do I need to change how I think about justice here and that's a that's a broad issue and I think we'll we'll touch on some possible strategies there but I do think that's a different case from someone who's just like no I want to be a great artist and I don't I don't care about virtue I don't care about happiness >> yeah the question is so to refine the question a little bit maybe it was at the start defined this way and it's just refining in my head it's like what does the stoic do or somebody who's at least interested in the project of ancient philosophy or even more broadly interested in the project of living well and flourishing and being happy what does that person do when you know they've received these instructions from the stoic to follow your roles and then some of these roles seem to come in conflict with that target >> y yeah absolutely cool so I think there are three possible there are more than three but there are at least three uh there there are three things we can appeal to to help think through these issues of course they're going to be different depending on the rules depending on the circumstances but I think these are are going to be three uh perhaps useful places to turn one is just returning to the hierarchy of roles according to the stoics you know they thought some roles are more important than others and that might be that might determine how we formulate our roles our craft And the other is to think about the subcomponents of virtue. And perhaps that that changes how we think about virtues as a whole. And then the last one is to actually appeal to other uh ethical systems for guidance. And perhaps that'll that'll be useful as well. So let's start with the hierarchy of roles for Epictitus. He h had about I there you can think of about four different levels of the roles we have. Um and this is useful for both construing what the roles are and then particular ones we we might have as individuals. So there's our role as a human. That's sort of that universal idea as a rational being. That's something we ought to follow. And then there's roles we have that are matter of our what I've written down is just personality but really capabilities. You know, you can't be a wrestler if you're not physically capable of being a wrestler. Uh and so on. And then there are roles we have in virtue of our relationships. These are both chosen and unchosen relationships. And then last, they're just things we choose to take voluntarily. And those are done in order, right? So if you're thinking about choosing a role, choosing to rob a bank, what have you, that comes in conflict with at the very least uh the human roles perhaps with your relationships as well. Uh cool. Do you want to add any any details to that uh quick blurb on the hierarchy? >> No, I think that's right. So, the robbing the bank example goes against your human role because the human role has some some content to it. General content, but content about being kind of pro-social. Um, it goes against your relationships if you like, you know, I don't know, if your parents also work at the bank and you're like not being nice to them. it goes against your choice. If you are an employee at the bank and you've kind of taken on this responsibility, you chose to do it, nobody made you work at the bank and then you're like, I'm going to rob this bank, then you're kind of like you're betraying that role. And I think in terms of your personality um maybe there's maybe there's some sort of like I don't know disposition or character personality and capability is this is just this idea that we should look out for roles that kind of suit basically this idea that we have some natural inclinations and dispositions and we should look out for roles that suit those. Some people just like doing kinds of things. People just like to want to work with kids. Some people like numbers. Sometimes we're we're good at certain things. We just happen to be the best hockey player growing up in our small Canadian town or something. And it's it's basically highlighting those as like almost these god-given capabilities to pursue and like talent to actualize. And so maybe there I don't know, maybe you're really good at building things and you use that to build bombs to rob this bank. It's a bit of a stretch, but it's this kind of, you know, this kind of perversion of a capability that you have, a talent that you have that you're using the wrong way. >> Yeah, absolutely. And uh perhaps the one of the most useful things to do here is thinking about um impersonal there. Um well I suppose going through these you know what what what can we take from these roles that might be useful in resolving these apparent conflicts between rule and virtue. So the first one again that's the role we have in virtue of being human. I think the classical stoic argument against mchaveli would be that mchaveli's picture of political leadership clashes with this. And for the Stoics, they saw, you know, what does, you know, what's the content of being human? You know, what what does that actually mean? It means acting rationally, acting sociably, you know, working together. We're meant to live together. And they also thought that it required uh elimination of the passions and perhaps also trustworthiness. I know in Brian Johnson's book on the stoic world ethics he mentions trustworthiness which I think aligns with those pursuit of knowledge you know the human rationality that's aimed at knowledge aimed at true belief uh in order to you know if we if we have knowledge then we can make good decisions >> I also think this is the role I agree with all that that's like that's some of the content to being human I also think it's the role that is that craft of living. Well, it's like the role that gives us that udeonistic ends. It's like if I'm because when we're not going to focus on that example too much, but I think what the stoic would say to the artist who's like, I don't care about being happy. I just want to make great art is like, wow, that's somebody who's like missed the human role and gone straight to the personality role or like the disposition role. It's like you have this talent, this interest in art, but you're pursuing that at the expense of this uh human aspect of yourself that you share with everybody else. And the human aspect, the end of that craft is always the end of that role, the purpose of that role is flourishing, happiness, human excellence. And so that's the kind of objection to that people who aren't playing the game, the argument we were talking about before. Um, and so I think that's that's an important part of that role. Yeah, that's a good point. So, do you think focusing on the um on this role can help address some of the other apparent conflicts we have between these other roles I mentioned about political activist uh being a boss being an impartial observer? What do you think about that? >> Yeah. No, I don't think so. I mean, I think we the tension doesn't resolve itself because all that person would have to say is like, look, I want to be happy. I want to live a good life. But I think living a good life involves being really really excellent at this or it involves committing to this. You know, this is not something being a parent. Like there's some roles that you just don't kind of you don't drop, right? Like you commit to being a parent. Maybe if you start a company, you commit to being a boss. Maybe if you become prince, you see yourself as like I'm I've committed to this role and I'm not just going to give it up to um because it makes me uncomfortable because there's some conflicts, you know, it involves hard choices. And so yeah, I guess I guess if I was if I was that person feeling that conflict, I would feel like the human thing isn't because the Stoics don't want us to just be formless humans. They want us to take on these roles and be people like Marcus Aurelius who have responsibility in in the world. So I think we want to be careful not to read the human role as like being so powerful and content heavy that it just means we don't take on anything else with the risk of it being in conflict. It's like that excludes some things like serial killer, bank robber, like we like we talked about before. The human role does exclude that. There there's just too strong of a conflict. But if I'm being a prince who's trying to like make my community happy, right? Even if that means having to kill some people, if I'm an activist who's trying to improve the world, even if that means doing some terrorism or something like this, then then I could see people not necessarily seeing that in conflict with the human role. Like we're still we're they're still fighting for pro-social. It's just doing it in more of like a utilitarian way than a kind of a rule-based way. >> Right. Right. Yeah. That that all that makes sense to me. Uh it's also perhaps there's some way in which looking at these other roles of personality relationships can bring out the conflict more rather than easing it. Especially if you feel like you've made commitments. That's probably where the you know the tricky cases arise where difficult business decisions you have made commitments to investors, other employees, your family and but perhaps these are all >> Yeah, I was just watching Troy which is a retelling of the Iliad and that's an interesting example of like at least the movie. I haven't read the Iliad in a while but it's basically like Paris is doing all these terrible things. He steals um Helen, who's like the queen of Sparta, away, and he basically brings her back to Troy. And it's they're just like, "Man, that was so dumb of you, Paris. That was such a dumb thing to do. But now we're going to fight this entire war and risk, you know, everybody's lives because you're my brother if you're Hector or you're my son if you're the king of Troy." They they do that for Paris. And that's like it would be kind of cheap to say like oh being a great brother, being a great father is like somehow betraying your human role. It kind of like yeah those tensions do arise because that almost seems like such a human thing to do. We don't we don't look at Hector and say, "Oh, you're inhuman for loving your brother so much you're willing to go to war for him." >> Um so yeah, you're right. I think that's where those kind of messy examples come up. >> Right. Right. So I I think this can be this can be use looking at the hierarchy of roles can be useful in resolving some of these tensions. But uh sometimes it does feel like either you end up to the in places where maybe your roles start seem like they start conflicting or sometimes the uh the content you have on these more important roles just isn't substantive enough to help one make the decision especially you know this idea that human that's the fundamental role it does have content to it. I don't want to say that it's empty or anything of this sort, but when you're thinking about, you know, sociability, what does that look like in the case of the activist who is pursuing a just cause, is doing it well, and knows that, you know, the effective movement, you know, forming an effective movement involves propaganda, involves scapegoating people, maybe sweeping some inconvenient facts under the rug or something of this sort. And and maybe that's, you know, they still feel the tension between those acts not being kind, not not seem not aligning with justice, but also the the the confidence that they're pursuing a just cause. Uh so uh I I don't I don't think it's uh you know, it's not going to re reason at this level I don't think is is always going to be sufficient. >> Yeah. Looking at the hierarchy, the I think I think that's it. The hierarchy is helpful for some of the outlier cases but not helpful for the more complicated cases. >> Mhm. I also find some usefulness in some of these other strategies. So one is looking at the subcomponents of the virtues. The Stokes had their own list of subcomponents. I think often we're we're wrestling with justice. But they also thought about sub components of moderation, courage, and to wisdom or prudence. And and the subcomponents to virtue or piety, kindness, good fellowship, and fair dealing. And I think if you narrow down on these some more, perhaps you can make some uh get, you know, get some mileage out of them. you think about particular you know kindness form formulating a disposition to do good uh just that inclination to do good sort of personal disposition I think checking in when these conflicts arise it can sometimes be useful to check in what your motivations are I think that's always key or you know what's motivating the action and you know are you really the person who's trying to be excellent in their role or are these tensions arising perhaps as a as a matter of rationalizing acts for less than less than virtuous purposes. Uh perhaps that that can be useful and and and I think also thinking about fair dealing. Um that's a knowledge of how to deal with others neighbors without incurring blame was the way Arasmus put it. But I think more broadly it's thinking about the circumstances one is in and what are the rules of fairness and that's going to be different depending on the political dimension you know if is it politics is the marketplace is it a relationship you know the Stokes had different views about about those and perhaps that can guide uh what it is to be just so for this one is it one one counter argument that I was thinking of and I just want to test Kale if this is what you're saying is there's this view the stoic might respond to Machaveli and be like you're just kind of being lazy like you can be a great prince and not do these awful things. You justify them as a kind of pragmatism or realism but really you're just not that good. And to use a simpler example, I think of like a coach, is a coach of high school sports. And that coach might scream at their kids, might scream at their students. Um, and they can justify the screaming and saying, "Well, I'm doing what I'm I'm being a coach. I'm trying to motivate them. I'm trying to get them to be as good at their sport as possible." And the the more experienced coach says, "Well, you're just kind of a bad coach. If you were a better coach, you could achieve that result without screaming and yelling." And so is this the is this the argument you're making which is kind of like you've got these subcomponents of kindness, good fellowship, fair dealing and the good prince would figure out how to achieve the result through these the good and it's just the weaker or the worst prince that um doesn't need to or doesn't isn't able to basically is that is that the same thing or or how do these sub components help? Well, I think they can help perhaps steer between uh how we're formulating the rules versus how we traditionally think of uh the virtue. In some cases, what you say is correct. You know, if you're committed to if you're truly committed to kindness, then you could figure out how to be just in your role of being a you know, whatever it happens to be. I think that's that's one move. So you might fall on that side of the the horn as it were. But I think some of these other subcomponents might change how you were thinking of justice. So if you take fair dealing in particular, there's you know there might be cases where in politics is it virtuous to take a bribe or something like this? I think the situation depends on whether you're in a country in a time where taking bribes is normal behavior or is it something unusual that's violating the um you know violating the the norms of politics if you will and in in that case perhaps maybe you should change your picture of justice. So if you think about you know what it is to be a good political leader well it depends on the time the circumstances you know what's required to actually create a stable or you know what what are the actions of of everyone involved I think that's um >> and that that might push you to you know changing your picture of what what the virtues were >> so I was I was actually I was misunderstanding the argument entirely. I was trying to say something like look really dig into really understand virtue and then try to figure out how to achieve that role while maintaining these things which are clearly good things. And you're trying to say when when you break apart virtue into its more more nuanced concepts. there is a way to actually resolve not all of these tensions but at least some of these tensions where we start to see the prince's action as just we start to see the you know if I give the idea of the soldier or the police officer from before you know um maybe in in a certain society that that falls under fair dealing like look you're doing your job you're going out and you're enforcing the rules which we you know are all agreeing to live by and so that's That's just and even in some cases that's not the perfect law. You know, it's not really your job to decide the law. It's your job like that attorney example. It's your job to execute it. And that that's fair game according to fair dealing. When we break down these ideas in more nuance, it it allows it resolves some of these tensions because we get this more expansive view of justice than just like Mr. Goody two shoes, perfect person kind of thing. >> Yeah, I think so. I think that's exactly right. It's uh Okay, cool. Well, I think what you f what you said is it's important to understand the virtue dive into its subcomponents and that can either build your confidence that the way you've construed your craft is a mistake or perhaps uh you know provide avenues for rejecting a common sense notion of the craft perhaps and maybe it's I don't want to say uh you know the prince Maki Valley's prince is acting justly uh though that's a possibility in some circumstances. But perhaps there's a cleaner a cleaner example of this is a lawyer in a legal system, you know, defending someone who they're fairly confident but not entirely certain is guilty. You know, they might realize, you know, what does fair dealing involve? What does being just here involve? It involves a broader commitment to the justice system where you know that despite being imperfect is you know works better if you know I play the role of defending this person even if I think they're most likely guilty or something of this sort then it would work it works better if people in my situation do that instead of you know deciding for every case they support taking it on their own discretion or something like that of that sort and you know that's that's something that's that's perhaps can be uh one way to think about these issues. >> Yeah. Well, I think I think those two probably realistically like moving from a philosophical example to practical advice for people, you know, people are listening and they're struggling with this. I think those first two probably capture most of this is like one if you're feeling attention because you're giving your life up to something that's not that like actually conflicts with the goal of living well then the stoics are going to say that's you know you're making a mistake you're betraying your human role and you're going to feel attention you're going to be unhappy because that's kind of the trade you're making and then the second thing is like the second view is like well if you're actually just kind of feeling conflicted on a day-to-day I'm assuming most people aren't princes most people aren't the kind you know activists who are contributing to propaganda you more are kind of encountering complexities in your in your normal jobs about like you know how do I feel about doing this I think that then that sub component says a lot of thing which is does a lot of work which is you know don't think of justice as this kind of amorphous thing break it down to these ideas of you know are you being kind are you being are you showing good fellowship you know partnership with other people are you treating other people fairly and then think carefully about what those mean and either expand expand those definitions to include the work you're doing and reconceptualize it and and don't be guilty about it because it's basically saying that the stoic doesn't have to be idealistic or perfect in some sort of like non-practical way. But then even even with the practical lens on if you still feel guilty about what you're doing okay then there's probably an issue um and you should probably resolve that issue maybe by changing your role, >> right? Yeah, I think that that's well put. So, the the last thing to think about for these issues that that can be useful is thinking about is perhaps cheating, but turning to uh other ethical theories, thinking about consequences, thinking about rights. Sometimes people talk about rights as side constraints. You know, what's something that constrains my actions or something I shouldn't do? And that's things that violate rights. you know, taking violating the right to life or something of this sort. Um, and I think those you can I think at a practical level, it can be useful to think about those kinds of things as you construe what a craft is. And this is something that's going to uh appeal to a lot of people who just want to reject say Mchy's picture of the political leader. Why is that no good? Because he doesn't care about uh rights at all. Alternatively, maybe there's some ways of thinking about, you know, what are the consequences you're trying to promote without just being a pure, you know, not arguing for utilitarianism. This idea that you should just care about the consequences, but at least that's part of what it is to uh, you know, play a role well is to, you know, do what's realistically expected to to achieve some some consequences and per perhaps that's useful. So that's a a broad level but I think thinking about roles as you know even if I take up this role what's something that I would take to be a side constraint to it or you know what what what's the purpose of this role you know makave valley sounds silly if it's just uh to promote you know some individual's glory but it's perhaps sounds less silly if it's about you know what's required to create a stable peaceful cityst state in you know this period in Italian history. >> Yeah, I think it's an important reminder to keep in mind, you know, what what what is the craft targeting? I think about that in terms of the reserve clause like the reserve clause in stoicism, one way to look at it as an ability to kind of move move fluidly between roles. So is like I will go to the bath house uh and I will try to have a fun time at the bath house in so far as it doesn't make me angry or you know ticks me off when people are splashing or being rude. And it's this kind of view of like I'm going to I'm going to take on this role of of you know person going to the amusement park but I'm not going to let it affect that role of like calm, cool, collected person. And I mean I'm I'm going a bit out there, but I I think that the the jumping back to this example was when you when you when you're taking on a role, there's a descriptive role and then there's the kind of purpose of the craft, right? So, as you said, you're a prince, but what is the craft aiming at? And if it's aiming at the well-being of other people, then that's a more complicated thing that probably deserves a little bit more time thinking about the most robust way to achieve that. Then if as you said if it's just if if the craft is aiming at glory um in which case you know we can probably throw it out and the conflict with stoicism is probably not worth thinking about that much. >> Yeah. Yeah. That I think that's a good way to put it. Maybe instead of consequences thinking about what's the target of this role and then what are those constraints or you know bumpers as you will that say you know you're never going out of bounds uh in order to achieve the target and being clear about those. >> Cool. Cool. Great. Interesting. >> As clear as you can. >> Interesting discussion. I I I I think I said that the I said that the hierarchy of rules doesn't really resolve the issue for the more complicated thought experiments and I and I stand by that. But I do think functionally for normal people, for my day-to-day, the hierarchy of roles does do a lot of work. Like when I think of these conflicts in my own life, I go back to when I say, "Am I letting this role I've chosen for myself affect my relationships? Am I letting this role I've chosen affect my human goal of flourishing and happiness?" And then I I I usually perform worse at it. I think like, you know, if I look at my career or something, I say, "Well, I'm not going to let my career I'm not going to become uh a bad person for the sake of professional success or something." And I kind of I do use that hierarchy and maintain it. I'm not as an important position as Machavelli was talking about. Maybe I would be more, you know, conflicted as an 18-year-old who had royalty thrust upon him or something. But for me, the hierarchies does do a lot of work. And I like this idea of subcomponents. The hierarchy is a good way of like not doing wrong, but then maybe it's like you're throwing out the baby with the bath water. And I like this idea of thinking, okay, well, if I pause for a bit and I think about why I'm attached to this rule, um, and I think about really what virtue really means, what justice really means, what courage really means. Is there a way to achieve that rule um, that fits these things? If I'm a bit more expansive about the view, that's that's probably pretty good for most conflicts for me. >> Yeah, I think so. That that's well put. I think um perhaps we've less left things in a little bit of a state of Aporeia or agnosticism for some of the more difficult cases we've gestured at. But in general for most decisions, I do think thinking about the hierarchy, thinking about or you know clarifying the nature of a role in a in a common sense way is going to resolve most most uh most issues. Really hope you all found this useful. I think it's the sort of thing that maybe we'll return to you interested or if there are specific conflicts uh someone would like us to take a look at or I come come across might well probably worth rediving back into this issue but uh glad I enjoyed enjoyed the conversation. >> Awesome. Thanks G. >> Awesome. Thanks for listening all. Bye. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use, and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at stoa@ stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
