---
title: "Who Gets To Call Themselves Stoic (Episode 214)"
slug: who-gets-to-call-themselves-stoic
episode_number: 214
youtube_id: 8zwTGv-hM7A
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8zwTGv-hM7A
upload_date: 2025-12-16
duration: 49:06
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to Stoic Conversations. My name is Michael Trombllay >> and I'm Caleb [music] Montiveros >> and today we'll be talking about stoic gatekeeping or maybe more accurately gatekeeping. Who is or who is not a stoic. I wanted to talk about this. We we don't talk about it too much on on our podcast, Caleb, but we have a newsletter, the Stowa Letter. Um, I've wrote a recent piece in that letter on this topic and I want to discuss that the same themes from the letter today. Um, go over some of those arguments and get get your view on it. I was inspired to talk about this topic. It's one I've been thinking about a lot. This idea of these kind of debates about well this person's a stoic, this person's not. You know, is is is Ryan Holidayiday a stoic? Is Cicero a stoic? Is Marcus Aurelius a stoic? are is modern stoism even possible when you're on Facebook, uh, Reddit, Discord, these arguments come up all the time. These discussions come up all the time. And I was sparked in particular by a recent Substack post from Laura Kennedy, who uh, it's called, "Is Stoicism just self-help for men now?" And she basically argues that the modern stoicism movement deviates from a lot of core commitments of ancient stoicism. And in her words, quote, the result is incoherence. Modern stoicism is attempting to achieve something that ancient ancient stoicism was designed to resist. So the kind of threat she's posing is that um modern stoics or the argument is that modern stoics are not stoics. And not just not being stoics, you can't just call them stoic version two. The the modern stoic movement is actually philosophically incoherent. Um it is it is opposite to stoicism. It is extremely um deviant from what the Stoics prescribed. And maybe we'll have a part two to this podcast. We talked about this before. We're like there's no way we can fit both the talking about Laura's arguments and gatekeeping in here. Um, but I wanted it really got me thinking about this gatekeeping question and why does it rub me the wrong way sometimes? Like I I both I both care about high standards and I care about what the Stoics thought. Obviously, I spent so much time reading about it and thinking about it, but then sometimes these kind of articles or these kinds of arguments also rub me the wrong way and they seem not productive. And so I I wanted to sit down and and think about this idea of gatekeeping, who really is a stoic and what are some of the pros of doing that? What are some of the reasons for it? And then what are some of the um mistakes or some of the ways that that can go wrong? That's what we'll be talking about today. Yeah, it's a good topic and there's a lot to talk about here and I think it's something that's both related to you know how do you interact with other stoics either in person or online how do you categorize people as stoic but also when it comes to uh yourself I suppose you know there's that question am I a stoic and that touches on some of these questions about you know what are the sufficient conditions for being a stoic and I've certainly met people who [clears throat] listen to this podcast or use a stoic app and say things like, you know, I couldn't call myself a stoic, but and then they'll go on to say all these things that make them sound a lot like a stoic and on the other hand also met people who [clears throat] had claimed that they're stoics without uh while uh either behaving or saying things that don't sound particularly stoic to me. So I think it comes up both in in the s so social context around you know determining who is a stoic you know what does it take to claim to be a stoic but also when it comes to yourself and your own identity you know to what extent are you a stoic or Michael or I so yeah it's a great great topic and I think uh you know what we're sort of thinking about is there's uh you know how strict should we be with uh with that question and What are sorts of the goods? What are the pros and cons for being more or less strict? Um >> yeah, exactly. >> So, um and and you put together a number of a list of those that we'll go through. I think uh listeners should definitely definitely check out check out the article also for for part two which touches on, you know, this is specific reasons uh Laura Kennedy thinks uh modern stoics are not stoics. And perhaps perhaps we'll touch on that on a later episode as well because I think we both have lots of thoughts on that issue. But today we're talking about you know when you're thinking about gatekeeping others or thinking about the question yourself whether you are a stoic you know how should you think about that? Yeah. And and trying to thread like anything else, trying to thread the right balance, not giving up standards, not hey, if if Jimmy wants to call himself a stoic, what's the harm? You know, let him this just doesn't mean anything. Just let him do whatever he wants. And then you got on that on one end and then the other end um you know was Epic Tetus really a stoic because he mentions uh you know I see sometimes that like Senica mentions crying or something at some point and so Senica is not a stoic because and I I get to the I'm like wow that's a pretty high standard you know like we're we're holding things to a pretty high standard at that point. Um, before we get into this deeper, I want to talk about, you know, I pulled this from Facebook, but uh, someone on the living stoism Facebook group, Alex Kaepern, I'm hoping I pronounced that correctly, but he he posted this thing called the stoicism alignment chart, which I thought gave this like nice framework for how lenient or strict you can be. [snorts] And it divides stoics in in two aspects. One is kind of theoretic theory, and the other is historical context. So um you imagine it like an alignment chart like a D&D character. And so in the top lefthand corner you have someone who is a theory purist. They think you're only a stoic if you adhere to stoic orthodoxy in in all or most respects and a historical purist. So you must be from the time and place where stoicism was from. And so someone who's a theory purist and a historical purist would think only Zeno, only Chrysopus are stoics, maybe not even, maybe Marcus, maybe Senica, but even then you're getting some Roman influence in then in there. And then you know you can move away to the bottom right hand corner which is a theory rebel and historical rebel which is you know they don't need to ascribe exactly to stoicism as long as they get the vibes right and they don't need to have any sort of kind of historical or cultural connection to the movement at all. Um I think myself I mean it's an interesting question I not exactly the question of this podcast interesting question where we fall on that chart. We're interested where you fall on that chart Caleb. I'm probably somewhere between a theory purist and a theory neutral. Um, according to this chart, like I think I think you need to there's some core parts of stoicism you need to adhere to to be a stoic, but my list of what those pure things what those core things are might be a bit smaller than other people. And then I'm definitely historically neutral. I think anybody in any period of time can be a stoic as long as they believe and are practicing the philosophy. That's probably where I land. Do you have any do do you have a initial sense before we get into the pros and cons of thinking about things this way? >> Oh, yeah. I mean, it's interesting. It's definitely an interesting framing. I think I would be pretty probably pretty similar to you where uh I wouldn't call Cicero a stoic. So, in that sense, I would be closer to a theory purist perhaps. But um and the historical question is interesting. I do think there are some interesting challenges about to what extent you can capture your following. I would say maybe I put it this way. I would say that I'm historically ultimately historically neutral when it comes to you know calling someone a stoic today or not. But it is plausible to me that the tradition is just so different from what it was hundreds of years ago that that shouldn't be underrated or missed. And I think there's probably similar issues when you think about religious practice as well, you know, like who's a who's a Christian today. Is it really >> you know, of course, Christianity has changed over the centuries. Um, and uh, even if there's some core that's remained consistent, it would be a mistake to overlook that. So, the same is probably true for stoicism. I mean, I like that idea. I think what I'm getting from what you're saying is that you're a theory purist or somewhere in that theory purist bucket and then historically neutral, but you doubt there's questions about our capacity to be theory pure when we're so far removed from the life and time and context of these thinkers. Is that is that is that your point? Like we just don't think about the world the same way a Greek or a Roman does. >> Yeah, I think so. We don't think about the world the same way as Greek Greeks or Romans and our context is sufficiently different to, you know, make sure that there is a radical gap. Perhaps people can go too far, but there's always this it's almost a paradox, I think, when you read about ancient lives. You know, you know, at once the past is an alien country and at the same time everyone seems the same. you know, they they have the same worries about their status, same loves, pleasures, but then they'll say something completely out of the blue that makes you realize that they think completely differently than than you do. So, >> I I maybe I'm not solving that paradox, but I do think we should uh acknowledge that it's there. >> Yeah. And then I might think of like maybe we have like a Ryan Holiday that you're in like a theory neutral where I think generally gets the thrusts of things. I mean there you when you're talking about Ryan Holidayiday you probably have to look over the course of his career too as I think he's like learned a lot more about stoicism as he's went but maybe if you think about an early book like the obstacles the way or ego is the enemy you're kind of getting the general thrust of the theory right but maybe not all aspects of it exactly. Exactly correct. And then I think maybe like the theory rebel is somebody who just you know they don't show a lot of emotion or you think of like a broic broism as we talk about now is somebody who thinks stoicism is just um you know not not showing or expressing your emotion that we call that person stoic and there's only this kind of tangent tangential relationship with the historical practice. Anyway, I think it's an interesting thought experiment. It's in it's in my Substack article if you want to look at the framework. But now to some of the pros and cons of having these kinds of conversations. You might think, what's the point of this? And I want to start with some of the pros because I'm going to get I'm going to get critical in a second, but I do think there is a pro to it. Um the first pro, so just we're specific what we're talking about. I see this all the time. Someone argues Ryan Holidayiday isn't a stoic, for example, and somebody else comes on and goes, "Hey, Ryan Holidayiday has done more for popularizing stoicism than you ever will. Why are you calling him not a stoic? Why are you criticizing him? And this is the kind of exercise we're talking about where someone comes on and says, "Modderern Stoics aren't real stoics." Hey, these are people trying to improve their lives. Why are you coming in and why are you criticizing that process? Just like let them try to be better people, you know, leave them alone. And so, what are some of the actual pros of doing this? I'm going to start with that. Um the the first pro of gatekeeping stoicism is just that it maintains a high standard in the pursuit of truth. So I have a PhD in stoicism as you know. And then I think about we we we see gatekeeping in academia all the time. Like I had a PhD examination. People don't automatically pass PhDs PhD examinations. Like that's the point of having one. they bring in an external examiner who's from a different institution just to limit the amount of bias. So if you produce something bad, that person is supposed to their role is to be like uh I don't know you guys are friends or something, but this is like not good. We're not letting this pass. And the the the function of that is basically to maintain a high standard to make sure that people that call themselves PhD PhDs signal a certain amount of legitimacy or a certain amount of skill in the field. And so this the gatekeeping stoicism I think has the same function. When you when someone says you're not being stoic right now or that person is a stoic, they're kind of signaling either an exemplar or somebody who's living up to the ideals or they're signaling that you're not an exemplar and you're failing to live up to those ideals. And I know when I w I probably still still encounter this, but especially when I was learning it, it's helpful for people to tell you that your view is not stoic. It's helpful for people to tell you that your interpretation isn't accurate. Um, that it contradicts passages or books you haven't read before. That your understanding is flawed and it sounds more like Epicuranism or Buddhism than Stoicism. These are helpful things if you're in the pursuit of truth uh and you want to really understand what stoicism is because stoicism is about the pursuit of truth. So um if you call yourself a stoic, you want to make sure which is about living a life that's uh in accordance with the nature of things and about achieving knowledge, you want to make sure you understand what that means and what that commits you to. And it's helpful for other people to point that out or to hold that to a high standard. I do think um the argument is is really very simple but it is a good one just that you even from the stoic perspective you're ultimately concerned with knowledge to the extent that it can be obtained. So of course if you are going to call yourself or others stoic you want to be accurate in that description. [laughter] So and then and then I think there's there is per perhaps a question you know how loose or tight should one be with that definition. I think it's fairly clear that there's at least some, you know, common standards of continuity or dogma uh with the original Stoic schools that we see and some of key claims that, you know, you can't call yourself a Stoic if you're disagreeing with the Stoics's rivals or, you know, claiming that indifference can trump the value of virtue or something of that nature if you have a completely different ethical system. So in a way this is like I think a common sense common sense claim and a a good argument that we accept in other domains when it comes to a PhD. You know I think in your article you mentioned jiu-jitsu and having a standards that you know you can't just give yourself a black belt or what have you. >> Yeah. You can go buy a black belt on Amazon the same way you can call yourself a stoic. It like doesn't make it true is the [laughter] >> Yep. Yeah. Exactly. >> Yeah. And then that gets I mean the point you were raising it gets to my second point which is that defining stoicism and saying that is not stoic forces you to think very philosophically very carefully about what the essential commitments of stoicism are like you as you were just saying well you can't be a stoic and disagree with the essential commitments and it's almost then like when we talk about theory purist versus the theory rebel the difference there is about how the the list and the in I guess extent and intensity of the theoretical commitments that must be passed to be earn that title. You know, somebody might just say, well, you don't cry at a funeral, you're stoic. And then somebody might say, well, you've got to completely adhere to the stoic conception of physics, uh, ethics and epistemology, uh, as written by Zeno. Um, and so you you in order to even do the practice of gatekeeping, you need to think really carefully about what the Stoics actually thought and then which of those thoughts or arguments are essential to the system, which is a really fun helpful philosophical exercise. I think it really helps clarify your thinking on these topics. And in the article I talk about an idea by James Daltry which is the stoic trident which is this idea that there's whenever we're talking about stoicism there's three different things going on. There's what the stoics think. There's like descriptively the stoic arguments. There's what we think about the stoics thought. So do we think that's a stupid argument or a good argument? Do we think it's a good argument weakly argued? And three what do we think regardless of the stoics? So do we have a view um that is entirely different than the stoics and those things often get conflated in conversation. I see a lot of the times people try to adopt their or or they they like stoicism. They find it intuitive. They think it's a it's a good label and they start to add their own ethical intuitions onto stoicism. Like this idea of free will. We see I see a lot of people just assuming the Stoics endorse free will uh or like a non-deterministic universe, I should say, more concretely. And that's just like not the case. That's just not not what they say if you if you look at what they say anywhere. Um but I think people are are thinking about what they think and trying to fit it into the stoic system where the gatekeeping exercise is almost the opposite direction. It's almost I've got to be really clear and careful about what the Stoic's thought as an and then I can see how that fits up to what do I think about that and then how does that fit against what I think ethically about living well or um about you know the nature of God or free will or the universe in in other ways. Basically, that that's a long-winded way of saying I think it's really helpful to try to think about what the essential aspects of any philosophy or way of thought are. And gatekeeping requires you to do that. And essentially when you debate other people about it, it's a philosophical debate about those essential qualities. And I think that's just intellectually helpful. >> Yeah. This is just just that exercise of thinking what are the core commitments of the stoics and of course that's a theoretical discussion but it's also a discussion about you know life philosophy you know what the stoics think was ultimately meaningful and uh their beliefs the way they thought of course influenced uh their decisions so if you think if you're maybe a little skeptical of the discussion thinking this is mostly a theoretical matter I think there's there's still that argument that no their views whether especially about you know their ethical views what's valuable did matter for how they behave for the decisions they made quite often so I think there's there's there's that line of thought as well >> I mean this comes out in the piece uh the piece by Laura Kennedy you know if you think not pursuing any sort of external success is an essential component of being a stoic then that's has a that has significant implications for how you live and how you choose to structure your life. If you don't think helping your neighbor, having connections to your family, caring about justice as a virtue, if you don't think of that as an essential part of stoicism, then that's going to very much influence the way that you act and treat people even when trying to be a stoic. So, um, great point. It's not just a theoretical argument, even though as much as I like those, it uh it forces you as a practitioner to say which basically which things do I have to do and or because I don't think you have to do everything perfectly to to call yourself a stoic. Which things should I be aiming to do long term? Which skills should I be aiming to develop long term? Um, I don't think you're not a stoic if you struggle with desire over um, you know, food or um, any sort of external like that. But you would think if you were trying to be a stoic, you would say, well, that's something that I have to kind of overcome or focus on in the long term um, as I as I continue to practice. >> Yeah, absolutely. And then the third benefit benefit. So first benefit is like we want to we want to have standards and that's helpful when pursuing the truth. Can't just call anything anything. Second argument is that it forces you to find what's essential about stoicism. The third benefit of gatekeeping is that as practitioners it can have a motivating effect. It can be um encouraging. Um and so example I use is that Epictitus he used to mock his students and he he would ask them to show him a single stoic. He would say quote observe observe your own behavior in this way and you'll find out what school you belong to. You'll find that most of you are Epicurans and some few are parapotetics but pretty feeble ones at that. For by what action do you prove that you think virtue equal and even superior to all other things? Show me a stoic if you have one. where or how you can show indeed a thousand who can repeat the stoic quibbles, but do they repeat the epicuran ones less well? And so this is this is stoic gatekeeping at its best, right? Epictitus is saying, "You claim to be Stoics, but when I look at you, I see Epicurans and Arisatilians." And it's it's it's almost a two-part challenge. One part is like, "Live up to the title you're giving yourself. Live up to the high standard you've set for yourself. And then I think the other challenge is just like which I I do a lot to people is like if you don't agree with stoicism leave if you don't like you don't have to call yourself a stoic. If you don't agree with stoicism if you're more of an arisatilian or you're more of an epicuran call yourself that like be consistent with how you live and and how you call yourself and that will help a lot of people too because I don't expect everybody in listening to this podcast to be a stoic. It's not necessary, but you you would want everybody listening, myself included, to try to be consistent. And if you find yourself not meshing with a part of the philosophy, it's either like you need to hold yourself to a higher standard or you can you don't have to be you don't have to fully ascribe to the philosophy either, but just make sure you're clear on um which parts you are ascribing to and which which you aren't. Yeah, I love that quote from Epictitus. Uh I do I do find it motivating. There's a sense in which um I think another complication that comes into this debate or complication. But uh if you think about the term and why some people might be uncomfortable calling themselves a stoic is that in a way it's an aspirational term. They would they might say, you know, I aim to believe like a stoic or aim to act like a stoic, but I'm not not there yet. And I think to the extent that's true, you if you paint the stoic as as if you if you paint them as someone worth emulating someone with high standards both in action and thought, then uh you might be a little bit closer to the gatekeeping side. Even though maybe you think it's it's something to aspire to, something you you're trying a model you're trying to get closer to. Yeah. What do you think about that? >> Well, I love that we had the gatekeeping matrix, the the 3x3 alignment chart. You're saying it's a gatekeeping cube basically where you've got your historical, you've got your theoretical commitments, and then you've got your practice. So, like, are you a stoic if you say you believe what the stoic thoughts, but you don't act like it? And you're you're basically introducing this third dimension. And so, and this is maybe what Epictitus is saying is saying, "You all tell me you all believe what the stoic say, but when I look at your actions, I don't see it." Um, and so the stoic is the person who says who believes the stoic things, but also acts in a stoic way or, you know, in in the stoic view claims to believe because you you couldn't not act that way if you believed it, really truly had internalized it. I like that idea. makes you a more a more harsh gatekeeper if you introduce that kind of third practice dimension. Um, and then I think I think the other thing you hit on is I think a really clear view. You know, I sometimes call myself a philosopher and people will scoff at that. It's just like some things just seem weird to say, you know. Um, it's like it is does does trying to be a stoic This is probably the single biggest divide. Does trying to be a stoic make you a stoic or like does does aligning yourself to that practice qualify you or is it only when you kind of achieve a certain level of that practice? I'm pretty I'm probably pretty low on the practice scale. I think practice is probably pretty low because I think it's just more meaningful to say you're a good stoic or a bad stoic. You know, like I I come from the martial arts background where I would say, "Yeah, if you do if you do three weeks of jiu-jitsu, you're a jiu-jitsu guy. You just suck." Um, but I'm not going to say I'm not going to say you're not a jiu-jitsu fighter until you get your black belt. I think I think I think excluding that sto and and again stoic doesn't mean master. They had they had a term for master. It was the sage. The stoic just means for me at least the stoic just means the person that puts themselves on that journey. Um although maybe you could debate Epictitus doesn't agree which is why he's using this kind of language. Yeah, that's a great I think that's a good or a clear position. It's sort of like, you know, we'll let you in the stoic door, but that doesn't mean we're going to call you a good stoic. >> Yeah, >> that's that's, you know, that's where everything begins, as it were. >> Cool. Anything else on the benefits of gatekeeping? I would say there's a there's almost a social benefit to gatekeeping that related to these arguments, which is that it maintains the character of a social group more tightly. And it's just a sort of a fact of the matter that uh you know, in order to tend a garden well, you need to take out the weeds. You can't plant whatever you want. And uh there's a sort of a social element to this which is if you want to maintain a culture of course you need uh to define the culture that you want to maintain and only let in people as it were who show the sign that they will maintain you know what's essential to to the culture which of course is consistent with some amount of evolution but that's uh I think that that social element shouldn't be overlooked you know it's It's present in some of the metaphors we use, but I think uh it's worth stating explicitly as well. >> And you take that as a benefit. Is that what you're saying? [snorts] >> Yeah. I mean, I think that's a benefit. You know, if you think about that as a as a um if you think about other analogies of, you know, this is what we want to do with our company and we want to make sure people subscribe to the general values. You know, that's a important process of hiring. And I think there's sort of a similar but much larger more diffuse effect you see with ideologies generally where you know if you're it doesn't take much to claim that you're a Christian or something of this sort then of course you're going to get divisions different kinds of Christianity of course other Christians will think there might maybe there are some tents that are too big or something of this sort where they cease to become Christian at all perhaps universalists are an example of this >> but I I I do think there's something to that to that argument. And this perhaps this becomes a bit of a rant at this point, but in a way if you uh if you uh of course if you're very tolerant of determining who's gets to be a Christian or not, then you've already made a division between other kinds of Christians and yourself. And perhaps perhaps we see that with stoicism to some extent. You know, different kinds of modern stoics, traditional stoics, people who just ingest a little bit of the content and such and start to call themselves stoics. So anyway, >> yeah, I mean we one of our first episodes was the six kinds of stoicism where we talk about these these groups that have kind of like self-formed or been divided up. Um, yep. Great. So I'm going to move on to the risks of gatekeeping stoicism. And so these are what I see as the downsides. The first one is that um it can make people pedantic and too theoretical. So stoicism it's about achieving knowledge but knowledge is best demonstrated through action not through philosophical debate. Um I have a quote here from Epictitus where Epictitus says the philosophers therefore first exercise us in theory which is the easier task and then lead us to the more difficult. For in theory there is nothing to oppose us uh to oppose our following what we are taught. But in life there are many things to distract us. And so the view there is you need to learn the theory than you need to put it into practice. And putting into practice is is harder by definition. um well maybe not by definition but by the stoic's definition and so I worry when you get when you stay in the land of defining stoicism too much you stay in the land the theoretical land and you can get very precise you can have [snorts] a lot of authority you can think very carefully about these things without having to to transition to the other land which is the doing land um and so you you know being the best at describing the stoic virtue of justice and which behaviors count as it and which don't and what are the sub virtues. It's not the same thing as being the kindest friend in practice. And to me being courageous in the face of evil is is more stoic than someone who has published on stoic ethics. I think in many ways we hit on this in our earlier part of this conversation where there's just this division between the theor the theoretical and the practical and you could gatekeep in terms of the practical but maybe it's just the result of being online. Nobody knows each other. We're all just publishing these articles or talking to each other. We we we're then gatekeeping in terms of the um we're often gatekeeping in terms of the theory, in terms of the beliefs and the arguments. And I just think there's a danger there to feel like I I talked before about there's a value of defining the necessary qualities of stoicism. There is a value to that. That's not the end of stoicism. And so like staying in that world too long I think is dangerous for the ultimate goal. >> Yeah, I think so. And perhaps to make that more concrete, it sometimes seems like arguments about uh whether stoic should be theists or not, whether they should believe in providence sort of enter into this domain where it's not clear that you know if you don't believe in providence but you still believe in virtue like the classical stoics still believe in some of the essential claims of stoic ethics and logic. It's not clear to me that you know you would act differently. you would even think significantly differently from Stoics who do in fact see uh providence as a fundamental fact of reality. So that often I think that debate can get although it's important it does seem like it can can lean has that risk where it can lean to be uh too theoretical. I do think it's important for Stoics to know what the classical stoic beliefs about nature, God, providence, and such were and that we're thinking through. Uh but it's not clear to me that as Stoics today that should serve as a uh necessary bar one has to hop over you know belief in God and providence so long as you have some of these other essential beliefs about stoic ethics and uh logic and can ground them in a philosophically plausible story even if philosophical debates going to remain I'm sure. Yeah, we're kind of refining our thinking as we go here, or at least I feel like I'm refining my thinking. We've made this divide between the theoretical and the practice. And we've identified that some theoretical definitions end up making a great deal of difference for your practice. Um, understanding and believing following the virtues of um the stoic virtues will make a great difference to how you live. Thinking that you won't be happy by pursuing externals and that happiness comes down to virtue makes a great difference of great deal of difference in how you practice and live. Understanding stoic epistemology that your first impression of the situation is not necessarily the right impression and that you need to be careful about what the truth of the matter is because it's dangerous to live with false beliefs. That will make a great deal of difference in how you live. But it's not clear to me the stoic physics, this idea of, you know, whether or not there are atoms or whether or not there is no division between things, um, that if you want to start saying, you know, you're not a stoic if you believe in atoms, it starts to it starts to feel pedantic and theoretical and it's like, well, why is that the case? Unless unless you want to be the most kind of extreme stoic purist possible. And it strikes me that that's the case because that's the kind of thing that as you said it's an even more extreme example but it's the kind of thing as you said where it's not clear how that has a great deal of difference on how we would live or how we would feel. Um now the stoic counter the purist counterargument to this would be well the ethics all flow from that. Um but there might be other ways to to recover and save the ethics. So that was a long way of me saying I think I'm agreeing with you and I think it's coming down to this let's be pretty theoretical pedantic and precise about pedantic is not the right word but precise about things that mattered to how we live and act in accordance with stoic the stoic ethical ends. Um but maybe we can have a little bit more flexibility around the things that don't have a big impact there. you know, like Epictitus' comments about like you'll have to kill me before I shave my beard. Um, [laughter] and like that's one of those things where you're just like, I don't know if I need to, you know, I don't know if that's if that's one I'm going to take with me or not. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That that line of specific I suppose there's a way of reading that as saying you have to kill me before I deny I'm a philosopher >> and that's the mark of a philosopher. But I think that is true that the uh of course there are many contingent beliefs that's a lot >> lots of shaved philosophers now. Yeah. >> Yeah. For better or worse. >> Um cool. And then the other counter. So one risk is it makes us too theoretical, keeps us in the land of theory. We feel like we're learning about stoicism and getting better, but we're just splitting hairs. The other is that it can actually get us further away from the truth. And so we want to gatekeep because we want to define what does or does not qualify as stoicism. [snorts] But there's always going to be some fuzziness around this. Stoicism's evolved. It's changed. Um Chrysopus re refined Zeno's work. Epictitus pushed his students to apply Chrysopus' work in their own novel ways. And you know, are you going to get to the level where you say, "Well, I'm a Zenonian. I I don't believe in that chrisipian, you know, uh deviation from the original thinking like are you going to get to this level of precision. Um when we do that, we sort of miss the forest for the trees. And there's some fuzziness about what stoicism means. But if your definition gets too precise, you've probably gone wrong somewhere. you've probably in the pursuit of specificity and um being exact actually missed some things or excluded some things. Um and and basically I think you've gone too far. Um I write in this I write in the piece a longer old joke, but I mean I'll try to summarize it quickly here, but it's it's it's the one where you know a man's a man's walking by and he sees someone about to jump off the bridge and he says, "Don't do it." um you know, are you a Christian? And he's like, yes, we've got this connection. And then he asks him, are you Protestant or Catholic? Protestant, me, too. And they kind of go through and they find all these similarities. And then at the very end, the person reveals himself to be like a slightly different version of a Protestant than the other man. And he pushes him off the bridge and says, "Die heretic." Um, and I I I always think about I think about that joke a lot. Um because you know these problems, these gatekeeping problems, they're not unique to stoicism. Obviously, religion's been encountering them for a long time. And I think when we're gatekeeping, we should be holding each other to high standards. We should be reminding each other about philosophical coherence uh and the implications that some, you know, you can't throw out um this part of stoicism and keep this other part because they rely on each other. But we shouldn't be trying to find the heretic. We shouldn't be trying to make our our inroup as small as possible as if that gives us something. I just don't think it does. >> Yeah. So, I think uh I suppose there's sort of a temptation or advice that's close to gatekeeping, which is that uh you're you end up being focused on the wrong thing. And I suppose it's the you know the balance that we began with. You don't want to be both strictly keep gatekeeping and loose gatekeeping can be a vice in their own way. Uh logical vices and uh this is the uh the side of gatekeeping too much of course. [snorts] Yeah. Like any good like any good question the answer becomes it depends. It's like a craft in a way. We want to do it because we want to pres preserve truth. You know, at its best, it's theoretically and practically helpful because it's theoretically helpful because it makes you really think deeply about what Stoicism is. It makes you understand what the Stoic's thought separate from your own intuitions and beliefs and it motivates you. It holds you to a high standard. It tells you which beliefs are essential, which actions are need to be a part of your practice if you want to be stoic. And then at its worst, it's theoretically and practically unhelpful. that's theoretically unhelpful because it gets us too small of a standard or it like distorts the truth as we start to become as specific as possible is that well only only this one person was ever stoic um which which I think you're just missing the mark there or it's practically unhelpful because it keeps you in kind of this land of definition refinement debate and that's fine if you're an academic philosopher those people stay in that land all day long and I think that's a perfect question to write your PhD thesis on what are the essential theoretical commitments of stoicism? Who qualifies in ancient history as a stoic or not stoic? Wonderful theoretical question for an academic has its limits as a practitioner. And then I I I suppose one thing we we we didn't talk about here's also just this kind of like antisocial aspect to it. Like you can just you can be demotivating to others as well. Um, like there's a difference between me you holding yourself to a high standard of what's stoic and not stoic and you going around policing. And I tend to be like a little skeptical of policing if somebody didn't ask for your advice um or didn't ask for your feedback. But maybe that's I don't know. What do you think about that? Maybe you're a little bit more intense or a little bit more comfortable with doing that than I am. What do you think? Uh yeah, so in a way it sort of depends on the cultural perhaps the con the social context and what what you're trying to do within uh your current group. I mean I've certainly seen interactions in general stoic groups where someone's clearly excited about something about stoicism but might say something slightly off and then they get critiqued for it. >> Yeah, I hate that. >> That seems like a mistake. you know, they they were excited about Ryan Holidayiday's book and made a post about how cool stoicism is and then someone just says Ryan Holidayiday is not a stoic. End of comment. [laughter] And uh like wow, great. Um so there is an perhaps I think especially in general groups that kind of attitude isn't I mean it just is positively antisocial. Well, which is a different which is a different question from is Ryan Holiday a stoic where I think in that case it's totally fine to respond to that and say no. You know, it's just like a different kind of thing going on as you're pointing out, right? >> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. And I do think there is some value to um that being said like I think there's just a different way of saying of saying that or even arguing for that view whether that's important in a sense. I think a lot of general stoic chats it's not that's really not almost a place not to gatekeep. It's in smaller groups where you know people have it's clear that they're not just someone saying they stumbled across a book or a video and they're excited about stoicism but maybe they're starting to get a little bit more engaged and have a view about what stoicism is. And I think in you know that the conversations with those kinds of people might involve more gatekeeping as it were. I mean, it's it's similar to an experience that I'm sure you've something that you've got more thoughts on, but I was just thinking about how if you let someone into a gym, you're not right off the bat going to give them whether it's exercise or martial arts, what have you, all these uh requirements for being a member of that gym or for exercising well, apart from some really basic uh you know, basic matters of etiquette. But as they want to level up, then that's when you might be a little harder on them, right? So I do wonder if there's there's something to this to this general model. >> Yeah, that's a good point. I mean, maybe it's a good point because you agreed with me with my view earlier, so I'm agreeing back with you. Um that maybe the most pro-social way is to have like low b low standards at the start that get progressively higher as you progress. And that's kind of like the student teacher model or the skill development model. um maybe some flexibility in that claim. You know, you don't say you don't you're not yelling at six-year-olds that they're not real soccer players because they're like, you know, messing up the drills or something. It's like you you you let people kind of where you might uh you you know, you you think of that music snob who says that someone's not a real bass player until they can play this piece or they're not a real guitarist until they can play this piece. Um yeah, it's it's It's not necess doesn't have the social benefit. I don't know. It rubs me the wrong way. I think that's fine for me to say. It bugs me. I don't like it. And I don't like it because I teach a lot of beginners things, especially in jiu-jitsu, uh, also in philosophy. And I think what's best to do is kind of encourage their intuitions, promote their interest, and do that in a way that uh, builds the energy, as you said, like, oh, they're excited about stoicism. I just read this really cool book. Build on that energy kind of. Yes. And it um and not kind of squash it or redirect it if or squash it or diminish it if it doesn't, you know, precisely land. But that's >> Yeah, I think so. I I think I wonder if sometimes I think that's pretty close to what I how I think about this. And I wonder if sometimes myself or perhaps you as well say things that on surface might seem inconsistent, but in part is just trying to play do our best to play between um the fact that we speak to people who practically something about stoicism has made a large difference to their lives and they're not say as they haven't spent as much time reading stoics, modern works, what have you. as uh as we have [clears throat] and perhaps they're not even uh inclined to to read that much at all and uh but you know they've discovered stoicism through some alcoholics anonymous group and it's made a huge difference to their lives and I think that's one group of people who we speak to and we want to serve well and but at the same and at the same time we're also talking to people who maybe study philosophy they have it's very important to have high existential or epistemic standards. They have an analytical personality that resonates with them and pushing, you know, pushing forward what modern stoism is theoretically is important to them as it's important to us. So, and [clears throat] I think that perhaps fits in with uh generally thinking about stoicism as a matter of building skills and uh broadly both in the practical and the theoretical dimensions to the extent that those can be split and I think uh you know it's not there's not just one skill hierarchy as it as it were that we're trying to speak to. >> Yeah, great. I think that's a good point. I mean, it just comes back to there's a time and a place. Make sure the time and a place in an audience. Um, make sure you're keeping that in mind. Um, leaning into the leaning into the benefits and trying to avoid some of the some of the weaknesses. And so, I'll go do a quick review on that. I I think one so benefits of of gatekeeping maintains high standards of truth forces us to think diff deeply about the essential qualities of stoicism and it can be motivating as practitioners. Some of its risks is that it can make you too theoretical, too pedantic, you're focused on minute details instead of practice and it can get you further away from the truth if you're too restrictive or too overly confident in your definition. So I think we want to good gatekeeping, you know, it supports effective practice by preserving truth and high standards, but it it avoids unhelpfully narrow definitions or focus on the theoretical. And that's just that's a balance. That's just getting the balance right and that takes practice. Um, which might be a little bit unsatisfying as a conclusion, but like most things just the answer depends and it's a bit of a skill in of itself as you were saying. >> Yeah, I think so. I think you're just you're trying to be at once pro-social and logically rigorous at the same time. And uh I think that's what we're trying to do. And to the extent that we're not meeting either of those goals, we're happy to take criticism [laughter] or gatekeeping as it were. So >> yeah. Yeah. >> Do let us know. >> Like I was saying, we're gatekeeping gatekeeping right now. So we're telling you how to No, you don't gatekeep like that. You gatekeep like this. This is how the real gatekeepers gatekeep. Um, [laughter] so thanks for that's that's the value of this. Um, great. Anything else you want to add? >> No, do uh well, I should say do check out the rest of Michael's article. I think it's uh didn't touch on it all, but part two is clears out some common misunderstandings with stoicism. I thought very nicely. So, do check out the Stoa letter if you haven't already. And uh thanks for putting this together, Michael. >> Awesome. Thank you. >> Peace. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. If you found this conversation useful, [music] please give us a rating on Apple, Spotify, or whatever podcast platform you use, and share it with a friend. And I'd like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. Do check out his work at ancient liar.com. And please get in touch with us at Stoa stomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback or questions. Until next time.
