---
title: "Why Stoicism is False | Cicero's On Ends IV (Episode 179)"
slug: why-stoicism-is-false-cicero-s-on-ends-iv
episode_number: 179
youtube_id: p7Uvyzcye1I
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p7Uvyzcye1I
upload_date: 2025-04-15
duration: 56:39
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

[Music] Welcome to Stowa Conversations. My name is Caleb Antiveres and I'm Michael Troble and today we're continuing our series on Cicero's on ends. We're at book four out of five. So almost finished and book four an excellent one. It's Cicero's attack on the Stoics. So book one presentation of Epicurionism. Book two, the knockdown. Vicurinism is refuted. Then book three we have the which we discussed the positive presentation of stoicism. Really a classic defense of the ethics especially. And book four is where Cicero says I'm not a stoic. Here's why. Yeah. I thought this was great. I was telling you before we even jumped on this was the most fun I had reading something a while. I've read this before, but it just it it is maybe if studying stoicism is a journey and you like different things at different stages of that journey. Maybe when you start you you like um introductory texts written by other people that kind of break down stoicism. Then you get to the point where it's like, oh, your first time reading Marcus Aurelius or uh maybe getting to an academic uh more academic book. This is like exactly my level of progress which is like somebody who's well read in stoicism has tried to put into practice in their life and is struggling with it a bit but not from an epicurian perspective. We'll get into it but Cicero you know they they talk about the uh the Aristoilian school the parapotetics um and their way to live as this countertoism and yeah I just it was it was great. It was it was like um exactly the kind of questions that I think about and worry about. And so we'll talk about those arguments today, but I just I just had a blast reading it and seeing it presented so clearly. And again, very rarely do you get something this clear, knowledgeable that isn't academic like Cicero is still writing from the perspective of somebody who's trying to live it, but comparing these different schools. And I feel like that's almost isolated just to the academics nowadays. Um so really really fun to read. Yeah, absolutely. I think Cisero is a great example of the philosopher statesman really or which is to say the kind of person who integrates philosophy at a serious level in their life whereas of course this has a whole another life as an aator plays a key role in the uh Roman Republic really. So I think that's a a good nice it's nice to have that existence proof as well. I think which is uh that it's possible to live the life of action while also and taking time when you can to think through some of these you know really challenging questions and here Cicero penny down what he thinks in this format of dialogues, speeches and such. Yeah. So, I mean, I structured this I have kind of like a number of smaller arguments against stoicism, maybe like sticks and stones. Um, and then I I think what I broke down to four substantive arguments against stoicism that kind of build on each other. We could start with we could go through these one by one or is there how do you want to tackle the chapter? Yeah, I think that sounds pretty good. Uh there's uh one key point you already hit on sort of framing a lot of these arguments that's worth discussing first then we can jump into the uh the arguments you you've collected which is that Cicero is sort of coming at this from the standpoint of an arisatilian or if not an arisatilian someone who's taken studied classical Greek philosophy and noted that a lot of these schools put virtue on a pedestal but they don't go all the way that the stoics do. They think virtue is necessary but not sufficient for a good life. um which is to say it's one of the most important goods if not the most important good that one should be pursuing but also granting that health that's good reputation amongst people who are of strong character that's also good and in a robust way in which the stoics deny so I think that's that's sort of an important point to get at the outset just that's a lot of Cicero's arguments come from that starting point where he's like all right we agree that virtue is if not the most important good a good that's powerful enough to eclipse many of the things many people try to pursue in their life but you know when it comes down to the disagreements between the arisatilians and the stoics philosophy is just preferred It's just better, not as absurd, doesn't play with words or what have you. So, that's what I that's just my one introductory remark. What do you think about that? Yeah. Know, you're right. It's how do we knock down stoicism? Well, there's it's not that stoicism is bad per se. It's just it's worse than the parapotetic school, the arisatilian school. And Cicero provides this almost developmental picture of philosophy. So first you had you know Socrates and Plato and then you had Aristotle and then you had the parapotetic school and then Xenocitium the founder of Stoicism came along and he de he he took up this tradition and he deviated and it's interesting because Cicero tells this we we normally tell this story from this um cynic tradition you know Zeno learned from the cynics and Cicero focuses on actually his lineage um with Polon who was the the leader of Plato's the third successor of Plato's academy and so does this more this life cycle of ideas having stoicism emerge from this tradition from the Platonic and the Arisilian tradition and then basically the argument is like well it doesn't actually improve things it confuses things slightly worse and look I'm not going to say a stoic is a terrible person or it's a it's a incoherent way to live but you've just taken something and made it slightly worse and then carved it off as its own school and it's like why don't why not just do the original better one the arisatilian idea is is the argument and that's a really interesting argument and it's a very compelling argument right when somebody comes and says well stoicism stupid it's like it's clearly not stupid but but there's an opportunity cost to practicing stoicism it's the way you live and so I find the much more compelling argument well you know that's a great way to live but there's this slightly better way to live and so why would you ever choose stoicism that to me is a much more compelling an argument for giving up stoicism. Yeah, I think so. I think it's I mean it's coming from a stronger position in a way. You know, if you're listening to this podcast, you probably found a lot of value from these Greco Roman philosophies. And uh a lot of the arguments for say virtue ethics or such might be good against different modern schools of thought, whether it's utilitarianism or just maybe modern versions of we might call Epicurionism, hedonism. But then I think Cicero is pointing a challenge which is all right. you know, we agree that these other philosophies are bunk. Now, why didn't you just stick with the classics? You know, why don't you just stick with Plato and Aristotle? Uh so, uh and and I think that's where we're at. So, we should get into these arguments. I'm interested to see how you uh how you formulated them. Yeah. Well, I I so I wrote down I was writing them down as I go and then I've got like kind of the big four, but there's some weaker ones along the way, which is I I've wrote as short form. Stoicism is confusing. Stoicism is not inspirational. I think this one is is actually has some more weight to it. This idea that it's maybe it doesn't have to do with the actual content of Stoic philosophy, more the way that it's presented, which is that they try to convince the intellect but not the heart. It's not actually a good school for inspiring people or changing the way of acting, which is kind of an interesting argument. I mean, obviously we've seen Stoics can be inspirational, but this appeal to the intellect. Um there's this criticism that stoic science is is general, you know, whereas the parapotetic school has all this great particular knowledge. It's got stores of facts about animals. Um and those I think are kind of weaker points, but um argument number one is that stoicism derives from the parapotetic school with very minor changes. We've already hit on this a little bit, but I think that's going to set up the rest of the arguments, which is that you're already really really close to the parapathetics. And so you you you you spoke about it a bit already, but the parapotetics school is the arisatilian school of of thought. And it's a virtue ethics. The idea is the the goal of life is is to achieve udemonia. It's to flourish. And then the question becomes, well, how do you flourish? What is the good life like? And for the parapotetic it's well it involves virtue necessarily but then it also involves other things that satisfy our the rest of our nature. So social connection a reasonable amount of physical security and comfort, good food, a place to sleep. These are the kinds of things that you measure up when you're measuring a good life. And so that's argument one is that there's there's a very small difference. It doesn't knock down stoism yet, but it builds the rest. that there's a very small difference between the schools. The only ethical difference is the movement of indifference from good things to preferred or in other words the Stoics take what they call indifference these external things and they say no they're not good things like the Arisatilians would call them. The Resilians would say, "Well, money is a good thing. It's just not as good as virtue. And so, I shouldn't become a terrible person to make money. But if someone offers me money, yeah, I want that's great. Like, I I want money." And they take that they take that good thing and they call it preferred instead. And and then the the other part of that argument also is that that makes no functional difference. Um, the Stoics end up saying that these things are preferred. And so, you know, if you look at the stoic walking down the street and you look at the parapotetic walking down the street, the stoic's going to go around and they're going to select money. They're going to select friendship. They're going to select food. And the stoic is going to say, "Well, I prefer these things." Where the arisatilian, it's almost like an argument from simplicity. The arisatilian has this really simple argument of like, well, these things are good, so I want them. And the stoic has to have this more complex argument of like, well, they're not good, but I prefer them because I select them in this case because nature has deemed that these are selectable in this instant. And the I guess that it's just this this argument of like you've made this small change. It makes no functional difference to how somebody walks around and lives. It just confuses and complicates things. I would say that that's that's really argument one as I saw it. What do you think about that? Yeah, it's um probably get into this some more, but in a way, Cisero's arguments have a common theme perhaps of saying it's almost like a dilemma. It's the Stoics are either playing with words and making no functional difference to the life of someone who's already a parapotetic or attracted to this philosophy or they end up saying some kind of things that are absurd. So maybe we'll get to that other issue more in some of the other arguments. But that's one way I've sort of understood the general thrust of Cicero's case. And to some extent it is comp I think it is compelling and sometimes we might talk like there's more of a difference between say Aristotle and the Stokes and there in fact is because you know Aristotle says in order to live a good life you need some amount of bodily health riches reputation and so on. But at the same time, of course, Aristotle values virtue and doesn't say things like you should sacrifice uh courage in order to become rich or something of that sort. You know, it's not that kind of philosophy. And on the other hand, the Stoics often will uh they'll agree with there are many decision decisions that ailian might make. Say, yeah, if you can pursue wealth, then you ought to do it or at least it's something you can do. if it's not something you ought to do. So I think I think there's there's a there is that um point but and then there is something to it I would say but ultimately it does seem like there is a substantive difference in how the philosophies view what's required for happiness and that's going to influence people's how the people think about their lives. You know, if you if you see pain as an obstacle to happiness, at least a potential obstacle, then you might live differently than someone who is more stoic and sees that as, you know, ultimately something that's out of one's control. So, there certainly is something to it. And, you know, if you're if you meet someone on the street who's rich, you're a stoic, you have more in common than 9% of humanity, perhaps. So uh uh yeah I suppose there there is that but uh uh in the end I don't think it's just uh in the end there there are some differences that are kind of coming in how you think about your life. Yeah. When you said that it reminded me of like whatever the phrase it was like you know we got 99.8% of the same DNA as a goldfish or something. you meet an arisatilian on the street, just remember you're 99% the same. Don't focus on the 1%. No, you're right. And I was thinking about that. I I think the difference is whether how stoic you are in like a trivial sense of the term um or not trivial but like a a non- philosophical sense of the term because I was thinking what's what's the difference between the person who thinks money is preferable and I will pursue money in so far as it's available to me to the person who thinks money is good but it's much less good than courage, justice, temperance. Well, the difference is that the Aristoilian has a reason to be sad. They have a reason to be angry. They're wronged when someone steals their money. They're harmed when somebody insults them. Um, and that's going to make a substantial difference, I think, to kind of your emotional life and, as you said, how you think about your life. Um, agreed. I think Cicero is kind of playing a trick here. Well, in all these cases, he's playing as characters and underselling that difference. Philosopy of emotion is a great example where there's a functional difference. You know, arisitians will will defend anger and grief in some forms of course whereas uh stoic you the stoic case is ultimately against anger of any sort and uh uh against you know of course senica has a line you may weep but don't wail but there is a sense in which the philosophy is against any kind of avoidable grief certainly. Yeah, agreed. And I think well I'm trying to make the argument that that's for the reason that yeah you because the arisetians have a reason to be angry. Somebody did a bad thing to them. Somebody harmed them and the stoics are just never going to make that claim. And so it's it's it's it's not just well the stoic is different on the torture rack but the stoic is and the arisatilian are the same in the office place or you know at the sporting event. It's it's not the case. They they they do have genuine reasons to be different um in how they behave and act as you called out. Absolutely. That's well put the other argument the other argument that Cicero goes into um so we've established there's this small difference. So it's like why even do the difference at all? Why even bother? Just you know why why do you go through all this work? Um when you got a perfectly good parapotetic philosophy right here. Then the second argument he makes is that there's a poor reason for the difference. So the difference is is uh has a poor philosophical foundation and this is the one that I find the most compelling um of the arguments. So the the stoics downgrade externals to indifference because they downgrade the body. They reduce our identity to the mind. And this is something that I push for and I talk about a lot is like it's really important to think about the dichotomy of control. What's in up to us and what's not up to us. This idea that other people can't harm you. It's really important to think about that in terms of identity. People can't harm you as Epictita says because you are not your body. You are your mind. You we we talked about this a lot, Caleb. You're a decision-making thing. So a good life is one of virtue because that's you fulfilling your function. This is not what the Arisatilians think. The Arisilians think you are a complex organism that is part mind but also part body, part social connection. You are they they take a more holistic view of yourself. You are harmed when somebody cuts off your hand. You are harmed when somebody um steals your clothes and your cold because this is harming your body which you're also a part of. You're also part of your social community and things like this. But the the sister's argument which I think is a good one or I think one that the stoics need to have at least a good argument for is like why why why reduce the concern to just the mind? um you you claim to want to live in accordance with nature. But nature clearly shows the importance of the body. No other philosophy does this. No other philosophy rejects the body in this way. And even if you take an developmental picture, which is the one the Stoics do, they make this argument of there's different kinds of beings and rationality is the best. So um you know the dog the the dog is different than the human. the dog should care about the dog's body, but the humans have an access to the vine, the divine. We're more intelligent, so we just care about the mind. And he says, why not have this conception where you just add faculties? You you Yeah. You um we can do things that the dog can't, that the animals can't, but we don't lose that animal part of ourselves. We just become a more complex thing, says Cicero, which is the Aristotilian argument. We've got this vegetative aspect to ourselves. we got this animal um appetitive aspect to ourselves and we've got this rational aspect but we're not just because we have a rational doesn't mean we lose the these other parts of ourselves. We've got to we've got to protect them with the mind. Um and I thought that was uh yeah I'm interested in your response to it because I think this I I think in all philosophy or in all of at least ancient Greek philosophy which is most of what I engage with this to me is my is the most compelling anti-toic argument. Why this focus on the mind? Why this rejection of the body? Yeah, there's a great line that sro states what uh you summarized. If man consists solely of a reasoning faculty, let it be granted that the end of goods is contained in virtue alone. But if he has a body as well, the revelation of our nature on your showing will actually have resulted in our relinquishing the things to which we held before that revelation took place. At this rate to live in harmony with nature means to depart from nature. So he's talking about you know the stoic developmental picture where you realize you're a rational being but then on his view abandon you know these other things you thought were good health pleasure potentially and such. So, uh, the Stoics on on this get get human nature wrong, I suppose, is the fundamental critique. You know, the the body matters. The fact that you're, you know, we're reasoning creatures, but we're also reasoning social embodied creatures might be one way to put it. And if you just focus on reason, you'll be missing out on the obvious fact that it's good for us to be healthy. you know, it's good to be embodied and in physical contact with others around us or something like this. You know, we're not just disembodied minds. So, uh yeah, he also makes a uh I just found the quote he also makes an argument which I haven't heard before which I think is a really compelling one. We often talk the stoics talk about pain as being an external that's an indifferent and Cisero makes the argument here almost that pain is um internal. It's like a part of the mind. So I'll try to find the quote here. So um even if we were not seeking the chief good of man but of some living creature that consisted solely of a mind even so that mind would not accept the end of yours. For such a being would ask for health and freedom from pain and would also desire its own preservation and security for the goods just specified. So I love this idea that even if you had a disembodied mind floating through the world through the world, it would be like I don't want to be in pain. I don't want to be unhealthy. So this framing of like health and pain and pleasure as being somehow external from the mind doesn't even work even if we just identify just with the mind. I don't know if I've heard that argument before. I think that's a really cool one. Yeah. I suppose the thought is if you can experience pain then it's it's bad for you or something of this sort which I think makes sense if you think that they're independently possess value. Yeah. I think let's get some of the other arguments on the table too. I think this is a good one but I wonder before we respond to it or think through it we should get some of the other ones on the table. Well the so I I have two more. The the third is that indifference are conceptually weak. Um so they force either a movement towards uh aristo or arisatilian to make uh readings to make them coherent. Um there's a lot built in there but basically it's like you've got a double value system where you've got virtue and vice which is good and bad and then you've got indifference which are preferred or dispferred. It's better to think of it's better to either move which is overly complex and it's kind of incoherent. It's better to either move towards indifference as having a small contribution to happiness that will never that won't overcome virtue but but still are a small contribution to happiness nonetheless or to think of them as without value which is the position that Aristo takes. We have an episode on him where he he says basically no doesn't make sense to talk about preferred indifference. you you've got every decision is made in the moment. It's an expression of virtue or expression of vice. Um and so so that that's I think argument three is that you neither you need to you you can't sit here with preferred indifference. You either need to go arisatilian or you need to get rid of them alto together. And then I think argument four was that the the natural conclusion of indifference is not the one the stoics want. Um you really you end up like aris aristo. He's basically doing a a pro-Aristo argument which is that if you if you don't accept the arisatilian position I mean this is I guess a continuation of argument three but if you don't accept the arisatilian position you have Aristo is right you have to go in his direction and if you do that you end up with all the reasons you criticized Aristo for which is that you have no way to make sense of what's right in the world because virtue is supposed to be about selecting between indifference. It's supposed to be about using indifference as the material of virtuous choice because you understand what nature sees as preferred and dispreferred. And if you end up going um Aristo's way and the only things that are have any value or virtue and vice then it's it's like a reductio adab absurdum argument like none of it ends up making any sense. So that's the kind of he I guess the play is Cicero forces you to go um nothing external has value or things external have value. If you want to be anti if you want to be anti-risiselian and go um nothing external has value then you end up in Aristo position but you already have really well articulated the criticisms of that position stoic school and you've already shown why that doesn't work so you're kind of stuck. Yeah, nice. This this made me think that it would be it's a pity we don't have Aristo's writings because it would be uh it'd be fun to read read more about not just his criticisms of the Stoics, but you know how he thought about the his philosophy in general. So, of course, we do have it secondhand from several sources, but uh yeah, it's a pity. Not the most charitable sources even. Yeah, that's right. Yeah, they're always using him as, you know, if you were your philosophy is wrong because it's too much like Aristo is usually. Ouch. Uh yeah. So I suppose condensing those uh two arguments into one, it's it's a dilemma where you the indifference either if they make a difference to your life, how well they go, you sound like an Arisatilian. If they don't then you're back in land of Aristo maybe some of the cynics right you know think wealth doesn't matter at all we talked a little bit about the risto option so um maybe like one way to put the criticism is that from the Aristotle side or from that horn is which is you say health is preferable you know what's grounds that what makes it preferable you know the fact that it Arisatilian would say the fact that it has value that it and the fact that it has value going back to this second argument is that you know you are a physical being. It says something about your nature that it serves uh that it fulfills. And not to cut you off but is is the same argument the Stoics make. The Stoics think it's preferred because of its connection to your body. They just think that that connection to the body is of a is of a different value type. Anyway, I just I I'll let you keep going, but it's like they still connected to the body. They just don't think it counts as good. Yeah, that's right. They think that's what makes it preferable, but not what makes it good. So, uh you know, that's the I suppose that's the challenge that he lays at the feet of Stoics. Um, and uh it's uh I think the um let me see if I want to read some more lines about him that that capture this. Well, I think another this is slightly not the exact same argument, but he had also has some good lines about, you know, the Stoics don't, this line about preferred indifference and such isn't a natural way of speaking. It kind of sounds like playing with words, but perhaps the deeper objection sometimes is that, you know, we naturally speak like things. uh like exile receiving a bad diagnosis are bad for us. So, you know, why not take that at face value? So, he has a few lines. Could an advocate wind up his defense of a client by declaring the exile and confiscation of property are not evils, that they are to be rejected, but not to be shunned, that is not a judge's duty to show mercy, or supposing him to be addressing a meeting of the people. Hannibal is at the gates and has flung a javelin over the city walls. Could he say that captivity, enslavement, death, loss of country are no evils? Which is just to say, you know, I think in an ordinary life, we act like so many things are evil, good, worth pursuing, worth avoiding. And you know, the Arisatilian view best captures that because they have some form of value. Whereas the Stoics ultimately almost you know parse that language as oh it's preferable dispreferable that's it. Uh but you know what's the what's the motivation for that at the end of the day is what Cisra Cisro is saying. Yeah. And and just to pile on to the Stoics here with this chance we get because after this it's back on the proto stoicism bandwagon. But it's like and this is the school that talks about being natural. This is the school that talks about living in accordance with nature. And so it just makes it a little bit more absurd than if they were like, "Oh, we got this." Like, they've got to explain why everybody got confused. Oh, you got confused at some point thinking Hannibal coming in and enslaving your entire family and killing you terribly was a bad thing. You got a bit got a bit uh turned around along the way. Let us put you back on the natural path. Um, and there there's just the there's a bit of yeah, as you said, a bit of silliness in in in trying to be like it's very unintuitive, right? Um, it's very very unintuitive and for the school that claims to be natural, where the risk of dealing position is like, hey, look, that sucks. it just sucks less than being a coward and like running away and leaving your family. So, you should probably stay and fight or something along these lines. And you end up with both people staying and fighting, but one person you're like you're you're accepting the situation as being terrible. Um, and in stoicism, you you're you're not. Yeah, this reminds me that there's a philosophy professor I know who thinks most modern stoics are really just arisatilians and wearing stoic clothing. I suppose um which there's something to that. I think probably some popular stoic people are and there is always that. I think you know Aristotle's got a plausible view. know there's some amount of agnosticism even even the converted have perhaps uh but yeah is this a is this a part where we defend a stoicism against Cesaro's attack I mean we can try let's think on that challenge um of how we would defend the stoics it's tough because these these are what I think are the most compelling arguments. Yeah, I think that second that Oh, go ahead. Sorry, I interrupted. No, I what I think are the two weakest part of sto like he has other arguments that I think are less when we call them like substantial versus nonsubstantial. Like another nonsubstantial argument which I agree about but doesn't really do any damage to stoicism is he's like it's kind of stupid you think uh there's no moral progress and that like nobody's only the sage is virtuous and everybody else is equally wicked. That's just kind of dumb. and he's like, then you'd have to say Plato was just as vicious as, you know, this terrible person. And like I don't know, that's a fine argument. Um or like I'm I'm happy to entertain it, but it's not substantive. The two substantive arguments for me in all of stoicism criticism is the the question of identity. Why do we disregard the body in favor of of the mind? And then and then what follows from that is the question of indifference and not giving value to them when we could have this like slightly modified picture where we give them some value but just a proportionate amount of value, right? Like get angry, maybe never angry but grieve the right amount, you know, be excited the right amount. Don't don't don't grieve in a way that is is disproportional or unrealistic or places too much value on what you've lost, but grieve enough to recognize the bad thing that happened to you appropriately, accurately, and proportionally. That that to me and if that's if that's the team position, those are my those for me are the two biggest things I wrestle with the most. So, we were supposed to defend, but I just want to clarify that I think I he he nails for me the two biggest issues. And I Yeah, I'm not sure if you have a response to either of those. I can always try the stoic line, but I do want to sit with those a bit longer. It's been pretty compelling. Yeah, we should uh I think uh I think the second argument this argument about identity and perhaps this related argument we sort of put in the same bucket which is around emotional almost like emotional I suppose it's ultimately the same kind of argument but there's a you know Aristotle thinks your emotion should fit the world in a way and sometimes grief anger are appropriate because certain facts about the world are tragic. Certain facts about the world are worth getting angry over. And perhaps, you know, we could bucket those in the same kind of argument because ultimately that comes down to, you know, what kind of being we are and the Stoics getting that wrong on the Aristilian account. Uh but yeah, I think that this this argument of identity is a challenging one. the argument about indifference I'm I'm generally a little less persuaded by but we'll see if uh we'll see how how you respond. So well maybe we could start there and then find our way back to this issue of identity because that is a challenging one. So I think what stoicism has going for it is a nice is really a clean logical systematic picture of what we are, what virtue is and how virtue relates to happiness. And in particular thinking about virtue just as this character trait about knowing how to manage impressions which ultimately is you know being knowledgeable and able to act on that knowledge and indifference are you know what you're deciding between of course is this the stoic line you know it matters that some are preferred or dispferred because that's how you make decisions And what happiness is, what virtue is, is the ability to make excellent decisions over time. Act, you know, act with knowledge and such. few different ways of stating that. But um that's why they're sort of the the goal is just on being able to, you know, think well to come to true judgments and make, you know, good decisions. That's the purpose of human life for the Stoics. And these indifference, they aren't valuable in and of themselves. They're just things that help make a decision good or bad. So to some extent, it almost seems like Cicero forgot or deemphasized some of what he explained in the previous book about the role indifference plays and their relation to happiness and and virtue. So yeah, what's what's your response there? I mean, I guess I swing back to the Aristo position, which is something along the lines of of why do we mean I'm just trying to think of like why do we assume these things have this kind of like good or bad content to them or what grounds their good or bad content? You know, if I'm a if I'm a mind who's supposed to go around seeing things accurately, that makes sense to me from kind of an epistemological perspective. I don't want to be deceived. But how do I Yeah. How are we getting the preference there? [Music] Um, and I I I guess I mean I guess it's no more complicated than how are we grounding the preference if not in the body. and they're going to say something like, well, we are grounding it in the body. It's just not as important as the mind. I guess I mean it's it's that gap there of like where is preference coming from. Yeah, sure. If we're a mind, our goal is to make good decisions. We make good decisions using the material of the things around us. We we decide based on sit the situation we're in. How should I treat other people? Um you know, what should I what should I do with my day? How should I act? uh but yeah what's grounding the value of those of that material you're working with yeah I suppose if so if you say leave aside the second argument say you know we our mind we identify with the hegemonicon or the prohyos what have you that's what we are then we just we have we but we also are embodying or making decisions about you know normal human affairs And it's I think this is where the sort of the rules or huristics or the fact that you know it's better for organisms to be happy. Not in the sense that it makes them live a happy life or not but that's what organisms naturally prefer is health. So there is maybe a sense in which the ris contrast is interesting because this the chance challenge for aristo of course is that if there are no ways in which things are preferable or dispreferable then on what basis are you making a decision and I think you know aristo sometimes in modern philosophy call it particularist like he thinks you size up the particulars of a situation and then just make a decision and if you you're virtuous you'll know what to do because you are good and you'll identify what the good decision is in that particular situation without making any claims about what's natural or what sorts of rules there are. you know, you'll just know. It'll be apparent to you. But, uh, I don't know. I sort of think I think it's natural to say Stokes love these game analogies. You know, we go to a particular game in general, it's better to score points in games. But, of course, in sometimes, you know, the sacrifice sacrifice plays are valid strategies. Even if in the end when you're playing a game, you're what you're trying to do is score points. And then I think what stoics just see our role is to play well because winning games you know these games of life that's out of our control that's something external so we should play well but you can make sense of preferred versus dispreferred facts and games and that's sort of what what grounds grounds decision. It's not like the I don't it doesn't seem to me like the best basketball player is following in the footsteps of Aristo or something like this and they just recognize the particulars in this situation is to do this or because I'm an excellent basketball player. So I don't know maybe that's that's a little bit of a long longwinded answer perhaps but no I mean then when you give that answer I just immediately rush back to the arisatilian side which is like well we make that heristic because our lives go slightly better even if it's a small amount by doing these things but that's where the game analogy really is. I'm not like fully convinced and this is still something I wrestle with or uh you know struggle to to wrap my head around, but it's clear in the it's clear nobody on the basketball court thinks putting a ball through a net is actually a good thing and yet they're still playing their heart out. So, it's like clearly I think the game analogy is pretty strong because you get people really caught up in doing something that doesn't matter, but it's a context by which to do something that does matter, which is perform. Um, so it clearly works in a basketball game. As much as it seems, I I seem to struggle with the idea of it working in in life, too. Yeah, I suppose maybe the Stoics would say it does matter that the ball goes in the net, of course, but it's not something that makes or breaks whether a player is excellent. Now, sometimes you do see these debates about, you know, famous sportsmen, they are awesome, but they didn't win any championships or something like that. I think that sort of crystallizes in a way a disagreement between it's almost a stoic versus arisatilian type disagreement. You know, wouldn't it have been better if this excellent player had more championship rings, you know, wouldn't that have cemented their legacy or somehow showed they were a more excellent player? And I think the stoic answer is no, it wouldn't. Uh that's just a different winning championships is not an input into whether you're an excellent player or not, which I think in a way sounds like a funny thing to say, but in another way seems kind of obvious where you excellent player, that's the guy you want in your team. That's a guy who makes it more likely that you're going to win excellent championships perhaps, but it's not a guarantee. Yeah, I think that's a really good example of theian versus stoic conception of sport. Um, yeah. Okay. I mean, really what we're arguing for is just that it's conceptually possible. Whether it's true or not, is it conceptually possible? And I think I struggle with it, but it seems it seems possible. And then the question is is it true? And then that comes down to the identity argument. Well, I suppose another uh uh attack from the Stoics against the Arisetilians would be that the Stoic account is more coherent because it in a way almost more simple because the connection between happiness, virtue is clear. Whereas there for the arisatilians they think there are different goods and virtues among those but you know virtue is not sufficient for happiness but it is a good that eclipses all the others and then I think there's sort of a question really about how systematic the philosophy is and how that you know what happiness is and how it you know what even is virtue on the riskilian picture and in some ways it I think the some of the answers end up sounding a little bit too stoic in a way and get help you slide into stoicism but or they're just not systematic, you know, courage, being able to face obstacles with caution and bravery, you know, that's what it is. But that's, you know, that's not really a systematic philosophical answer at the fundamental level. So anyway, I think that's maybe that's an attack the Stoics might have here where then it makes the sort of the funny things they say about indifference more plausible. Because although it's may not be the most natural way of speaking it, you know, happiness, virtue are aligned, you know, it's about it's about playing the game of life well, if you will. Clear it's a clear definition about what it is to be a great if going back to this game analogy, you know, there's a clear picture about what it is to be a great player. Whereas a risatilian now there's like how much do champ winning championships count versus their actual you know perhaps you know the actual skill in the game you know how many points they scored you know what's the actual picture yeah the stoics can go I mean that's a great point the stoics can go on the offense and you know give the same for logical fork to the arisatilians and you know look you're trying to get you're trying to seem so intuitive by giving all this weight to virtue But if you give too much weight to virtue, you just end up functionally like a stoic. And if you give too little weight to virtue, you end up looking like something not very appealing at all. Um or something that is maybe, you know, epicuran without saying it. And so you end up in this kind of confused middle ground where it's ambiguous about who lived well and who didn't. As you said, who's a good basketball player and who isn't. There's arguments or uh uh confusions. Um where the stoic has has a much more clear distinction. It's like this is the criteria virtue. Did you achieve it? Did you not? And you know if you did it and then some bad things happened outside of your control, well I'm not going to think any less of you. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Cool. Well, so much for the third argument. I guess the second one is is outstanding. And uh I think when perhaps we've said a number of things in our conversation that that address it in a way and maybe some of these moves are familiar but I think there is a way in which it's uh you know if you're a stoic even so it is natural to almost slide into this aratilian picture and perhaps if you if the worst you do is slide into arisetilianism that's maybe not such a bad place to end up. Uh so I guess that's not that's just to say that you know this picture that values virtue but also recognizes there's a place for grief for recognizing that you can be harmed by others that the body's health fundamentally matters in some way. That's a not a bad place to end up. Uh perhaps. Yeah. Well, sometimes I think about that like I'm not sure who you were who was the philosopher who said everybody all the Stoics were Aristotilians. Who was that? Oh, it was a modern fellow. I won't name him. I think just for sake of this privacy, but it was too too uh you know spicy of a take. What my thought with that is that like I I I I think something similar or I at least consider something similar and then maybe it's the case where like if arisatilian arisatilianism is right but we're so far from valuing virtue properly that if you shoot for stoicism you land in arisatilianism like if you shoot for stoicism you value virtue as the number one thing you take it as more important than these other than these other good things but you don't ever really give up your uh you know, you don't really ever give up your considerations for your possessions or for pleasure or the body. And so you end up with this really aristocilian picture where you still value those other things. You just value virtue the most. And so then maybe there's a picture there where there's this there if arisatilianism is the right answer. Maybe there's this benefit to practicing stoicism because we're all so far from it and it's such a difficult challenge even to get there that uh it gives us if we shoot there we we we land halfway and it's not a bad spot to be as you were saying. Well, do you want to say about anything about the traditional move Stokes might make against this uh this argument against the identity argument? Yeah, against the identity argument in particular. I mean, I think the argument they're going to make is going to be one of hierarchy, right? Like the Cicero appeals to nature. Well, it's natural that we have a body. It's natural that we develop these other faculties, but then should still care about our body. Every school descriptively, every other school of philosophy does this. Why are you being weird? You know, why are you doing this thing other people aren't doing? And the Stoics, I think, are going to appeal to hierarchy. They're going to say, well, there's this part of you that's better than the other parts. It is more divine. It is more godly. It is more important and not just a matter of degree but a matter of type difference. Humans are not like other creatures in in that there's a type difference that comes with being reflective, having the capacity for self-awareness, having the capacity for introspection and um you know so maybe a lizard is like a cat uh and there's not a type difference there but once you have intelligence that that is not the same as uh you know a blind animal gaining the ability to C or something, right? Like that's a new faculty that when you gain self-awareness, that's not a new faculty. Like a type change has occurred. And so, yeah, you you you should now identify with the top of the hierarchy. I think I think that's going to be the the argument like you are a pie, as Epictitus would say, you know, you're a piece of you're a piece of God in like a body of clay, right? Like he really emphasizes that difference. Yeah, absolutely. I think so. And I think that to perhaps to um sort of justify this view about hierarchy more in a way. It's sort of following a kind of philosophical tradition that, you know, thinks that ultimately human development is about mastering some of these lower appetites, what have you, some of these more animal instincts, desires and such. And perhaps the risen picture is sort of you know you want to harmonize different aspects of yourself you know roughly put but the stoic picture is know what the reason you know we advocate this kind of thing is that you know what you ultimately are is that harmonizing ability you know that ability to make things intelligible to make decisions to see the world And I think that's sort of the pro that I think that picture has some that picture is appeal just because it's connects to what you have control over. It connects to you know this picture of of nature as a whole as being rational and um and uh maybe it makes more sense out of the arristilian. Yeah, I'm not I'm actually not quite sure how to put this, but you know, this ability, this activity of being, you know, this ability to harmonize different parts of yourself, you know, that's what you are. It's not like there's these three different, you know, you have a trip tripartite soul going to the platonic picture. I mean, go ahead. Oh, go ahead. Sorry. Oh, I so so I suppose you know there's this argument that the mind is unified and if it's unified the best way to account for that is that it's the you know the rationing part the rational faculty that that's what you are. So maybe that's another another kind of argument I was just gesturing at. Yeah. Well and then I mean I I think this is getting what you're hitting on Kilo is that another way to think about what you are is the kind of thing that you can receive praise or blame for. the kind of thing that you can be evaluated for and judged for. And I think the Stoics maybe that's another argument. You you were referring to the repetitive parts of yourself or the the nonrational parts of yourself. And there there's this view that you can't be judged for these or you think about, you know, somebody being born with a physical disability and not just being like, oh, that's not just the Arisatilian picture being something like that's unfortunate, but this actual picture of like you're defective in some way. like you're you're you're worse. Uh and that's something that the Stoics are going to reject because that's not you. Um and they're like that that's an incorrect way of thinking about things. I know it's I guess it it doesn't provide an argument for it, but it provides a situation where it seems actually really intuitive because because sister is almost making this argument from it not being intuitive. We all think about ourselves as our bodies, but here's this argument for actually being intuitive to think about ourselves as our mind, which is like it's pretty weird to judge somebody. Uh, you know, again, yeah, if they got sick or if something happened to their body, we might do it, but people, it seems weird. And also people tend to think that that's like not a good thing to do. It's not a correct thing to do. Um, and I think that's a case when identifying with the mind seems very intuitive, I guess, when we're when we're like, well, what should we judge people for? what should we evaluate them on? Yeah, I suppose that's whereism is more egalitarian. You know, everyone has a chance for happiness whereas, you know, they're just a view literally as if you're physically deformed, you're not going to be as happy at the very least. You know, you don't have the same shot at happiness as someone else does. Um and uh I suppose that's sort of the other side of the coin of taking other kinds of goods seriously. If you think the health matters then the lack of it is an obstacle to achieving happiness. And that's so that's maybe in some ways that's intuitive. people we think oh I you know of course I prefer being healthy rather than being sick when in other ways it's not intuitive just because we find so many people in negative circumstances who seem to have a kind of happiness to them I suppose there's that there's that point in addition to the point that perhaps it's a mistake to judge those people as being defective in some way I think there's also the point that you can read accounts of different people in terrible circumstances or who have physical deformities but they seem happy nonetheless so you know what explains What explains that? Perhaps the Stoics have a better account there. Yeah, I mean, I certainly like the egalitarian one more. That certainly makes me appeals to me more. Awesome. Well, we've gone a bit over. Is there anything else you want to hit on? No, just I think fun fun chapter. Uh good good questions to think about. Yeah, absolutely. I think it's a great chapter. It really crystallizes some of those important challenges with socism. So, if you're reading along or not there yet, I highly we highly recommend uh recommend reading it. Cool. Awesome. Thanks, Gil. Cool. Thanks, Michael. Peace. Thanks for listening to Stoic Conversations. Please give us a rating on Apple Podcasts or Spotify and share it with a friend. If you want to dive deeper still, search Stowa in the App Store or Play Store for a complete app with routines, meditations, and lessons designed to help people become more stoic. And I'd also like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. You can find more of his work at ancientlar.com. And finally, please get in touch with us. Send a message to stoasttomeditation.com if you ever have any feedback, questions, or recommendations.
