---
title: "Wrestling with Stoic Ethics: Cicero's On Ends V (Episode 183)"
slug: wrestling-with-stoic-ethics-cicero-s-on-ends-v
episode_number: 183
youtube_id: N87qoLzQ-fc
youtube_url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N87qoLzQ-fc
upload_date: 2025-05-13
duration: 52:39
source: youtube_auto_caption
---

Welcome to STOA conversations. My name is Caleb onto I'm Michael Dway and today we're bringing you another conversation on Cicero's on ends. This is our last conversation on the matter. It's over book five which is a explanation and defense of the philosophy Cicero finds most philosophically defensible and that's sort of a version of arisatilianism plainism connecting to these Greek ideas that go back beyond stoism. So that's what we'll be talking about today. Yeah, this is I mean I've really enjoyed reading this with you, Caleb. It's it's we've both read it before, but really fun going through it and um as you mentioned the book is kind of this bouncing back and forth of Epicurian position, anti-epicurian, stoic, anti- stoic and now this is kind of the um the final arrival place where Cicero I attempts to genuinely argue for his position I suppose. Right. Yeah. So you get the sense this is the one that Cicero is most comfortable with. But it's uh interesting that he he also lobs some objection objections at it uh in the end. So we should talk about that. But it's a view we've talked about a little especially in our stoicism type conversation. Cicero brings it in in book four sort of using it as an objection towards the stoics. But there's a lot more to talk about. in this book. Anything else you want to say by way of intro? No, let's jump into it. This is the I mean it's the climax. It's it's uh I but I think we'll get into it when we talk about the content of it. So, let's just jump into let's jump into what Cisro has to say. Well, the way it starts is I think it's really an awesome beginning where you have this group of Roman men touring Athens essentially and there's this fellow Piso Cicero younger men and they essentially just list off some of these iconic places and what they bring to mind. So there's Plato in the academy. Someone else mentions this. This is where Epicurus lived. You know, the resident Epicurion mentions their founder of course. And then someone else mentions Sophocles. This is where Sophocles walked. And I thought that was just a fantastic way to begin the chapter grounded in a physical place and mention many of the thinkers, artists, really people who've made exceptional cultural contributions to Greece than Rome and really the west at large before moving into uh their philosophical discussion as it were. I think it it once gives the the conversation a kind of um almost epic feel in the best sense, but also is uh somewhat familiar. You know, you're just walking around, you know, visiting some place with your friends, calling to mind what it reminds you of, and then jumping into a philosophical discussion or what have you. So, uh that's uh it's a great way to begin the chapter. Yeah, it it also just makes me feel like Cicero is doing the same thing we're doing, right? Which is just engaging with this human achievement or like you know Athens is this really weird place where in the span of a hundred years you had a lot of you know I don't know how large Athens was back then 100,000 people was not a big place where you had a lot of philosophical innovation and we're still chewing on that today. Yeah, maybe we talk about Marcus and Senica and Epictitus, but we're, you know, they're deriving their thinking from Chrysopus and Zeno who are in Athens and um and so we're kind of wrestling with this, I don't know, this um this peak of human kind of philosophical achievement or this like really important moment in history and we're grappling with it and trying to digest it and understand how it relates to our own lives. And then Cicero is doing the same project. He's he's a couple hundred years later. So for him that's the past and is still in this kind of this awe of Athens but also you know wrestling with it, objecting to it, respecting what the Stoics and Epicurans have to say but not taking it at face value and wanting to be aware of the criticisms as well. I mean it's just yeah I just think it's cool that we're doing the same things Cisro is. Um it's great it's a great starting spot. Absolutely. So they jump into conversation. And they're sort of bringing up different philosophers and you have this younger man who's maybe he's just just coming of age thinking through different philosophies of life and he says that he's uh he finds the philosophy of Carnites plausible and then Piso is sort of given the task of defending uh the views of Antiochus who is this Arisatilian parapotetic fellow. So, just a quick aside on that. I know we're throwing out a lot of different names, but uh the kind of view that's defended is a view from someone a little closer to Cicero's time, Antiochus. But what Antiochus saw himself as doing was following in Aristotle's footsteps, who as a student of Plato was essentially a plaintist. That's sort of what it uh or following in maybe the best footsteps of Plato as it were. That's why sometimes it's called an arisatilian platonic type view. And uh Antiochus, you sort of saw was really one of these philosophical characters who tries to bring people together and say, you know, these the different schools agree on substance even though they sometimes say use different words. And that's what he says about the Stoics as well. Yeah. No, I was going to say like maybe we should do maybe we could do an episode on the neoplatanist and stuff like that. you're going to see the same thing in Plato that you see in in sometimes when we talk about Socrates like one one of the ways that I talk about this is is you have Socrates and then you have a bunch of people different people disagreeing about what the core teaching of Socrates was you get the cynics um the skeptics in in some forms the stoics and I think you're seeing the same thing with Plato where the academy takes on a lot of different movements through time where sometimes it's more skeptical sometimes it's more uh risilian in sometimes it's maybe more um traditionally platonic or something like this. Um but there's this kind of constant wrestling I think through tradition of what what Plato's view was because you just refer to the the aris if I was understanding right you refer to the arisatian tradition as being platonic but it's like it has its roots there but it's it's uh there's a lot of contention I guess at the time about you know the best way to follow Plato as well. Yeah. So of course I think it's a sort of issue where some plaintists would not see these people as plaintists at all where others I think antiokus in particular he's trying to take the best aspects of plainism say that you know Aristotle didn't diverge from those and walk away too far from those though of course there there are uh weighty philosophical matters of plaintists and recristilians otherilians would take themselves to be disagreeing over um but So it's a I think the the view is sort of contrasted with epicurionism of course you know Piso brings up different ways one should think about the end and he says you know the most plausible way to think of the end for humans you know what's our purpose what are we uh meant to pursue isn't pleasure isn't the avoidance of pain but it's the primary objects in accordance with nature. So of course there's a rejection of epicurionism and related philosophies and there's a use of this phrase which is really uh quite similar to the stoics. You know that's what the stoics say live in accordance with nature but the way he sees nature is of course distinct from the stoics. There's this nice rendition of the phrase from the oracle of deli, know yourself. So, uh it's rendered as the Python Apollo then bids us learn to know ourselves. Now, knowledge of ourselves can only mean this that we should get to know our bodily and mental powers and pursue that kind of life which leads to the full enjoyment of those powers. So I think what that captures really nicely is you know what does living in accordance mean for piso living in accordance with nature. It means coming to know our bodily and mental powers and being an excellent human where a human is you know this creature with a body and a mind. So in that way it draws out this distinction between ericetilianism and stoicism namely that the stoics focused on the mind the rational part the ruling part as Marcus Relius has sometimes uh translated as saying whereas the recitilian they've got a broader picture of human nature right there's a focus on the body in addition to the mind yeah I think that's exactly right um so well you know what you're saying is the the happiness is the perfection of your nature. It's the achievement of your nature, the attainment of your nature. But then there's still this question of what is that nature? And then that really nice I thought that was a really cool kind of playback to know thyself because know thyself that's that's a common thing in Plato and Socrates was really interested in that and took that as kind of like um there was this view of Socrates being like I I know that I know nothing and at least that's like one that's self-nowledge is important and that self-nowledge my own ignorance is important and this was kind of this um it was on the oracle of Delelfi uh and so it was seen as like this this you know maybe this I don't know transcendent or like divine knowledge and it's like well how do you interpret that? How do you understand that command? And I I often think about it in the Socratic way of well, it's about understanding your limitations, understanding what you don't know, understanding like uh recognizing your ignorance. And you can interpret that Socratic or stoically. I understand my ignorance so I can move towards knowledge. But there's this play on it here where it's like no, you've got to understand your nature because if happiness is the perfection of your nature, you've got to understand what you are. I thought that was a really cool way of yeah looping back in that that old platonic concept. Yeah, absolutely. And I think that's a central idea. This focus on nature, understanding what you are. You know, just as you know, there's something a good life for a horse involves the goods of, you know, excellence, perfection in a horse. I don't know that has to do with running, some amount of sociability perhaps with other horses. Whereas uh and it's it's given by the you know the nature of that creature you know its physical properties its mental properties to say it uh in an abstract way but and then the then the question is okay well what's a human and what does it mean to be a perfect you know what's or rather you know what's the perfection of a human's natural constitution. Uh and there again you look at the physical properties kind of animal we are and especially of course our mind and our our ability to reason as a as a differentiator between other other creatures. Yeah. And I guess to ground this idea like we still do this today. I think about this is a um think about sometimes when you see those like small dogs being carried around in a purse or something and you get this kind of like intuitive sense of like is that maybe that dog is happy? Maybe that dog has achieved pleasure, but is that what a dog is supposed to be doing or it kind of feels a bit like that dog is not dogging? Like we almost have that intuitive sense. Um I I also think of examples. I was thinking of like, you know, orcas at SeaWorld or something, but that that we assume the animal's not really happy in that way, you know. Uh I think I think you still think about this intuition. Just because it's an intuition doesn't mean it's right. But I think we still have this intuition when we see you can see kind of things in the natural world, animals especially, not really achieving or living lives that feel natural. It feels wrong. Even if maybe they have pleasure, it feels like they're not uh, you know, doing what they're supposed to be doing in a sense. And then the Stoics would feel the same way. If you looked at a human that was really caught up in kind of court politics and Marcus Aurelius's, you know, entourage and trying to impress people and trying to navigate and trying to achieve a position of political power and, you know, getting really nervous like their life would be ruined if they were to be lose out on some sort of promotion or position. They would feel that same kind of way. It would be that that same kind of sadness of like you're not, you know, you're not living accordance with your nature. you're not, you know, valuing the things you should be valuing or doing the things you should be doing. Um, yeah, that's my attempt to try try to ground it in example. Yeah. Well, no. Yeah, it's really good to ground it. You know, I suppose you just think of the cage bird, you know, the majestic bird prey, and you think, oh, no, it's not able to live the life that would be best for it. And then, of course, the human analogy here is perfect. you know, thinking about how people might cage themselves in particular ways or make themselves dependent on uh things that have nothing to do with our our nature and such. So, yeah, really good to to ground that. Um, and it's also interesting, a small aside, I suppose, but there's a Piso gets into some of the bodily goods, some of the mental goods, and he does rank the mental goods as higher in in particular the goods of the soul. But he says in addition to some of the standard mental goods and these are sorts of things that stoics get hammered for all the time, you know, not valuing health as a good. But he also says um so also certain postures and certain contorted and cramp movements such as lewd or effeminite men effect are against nature. Thus, in spite of the fact that this happens through some defect in the soul, nevertheless, the perversion of man's nature is outwardly exhibited in the body. And here maybe you can imagine someone who has that cramp posture of looking at their phone or something like this and you think oh maybe that's not uh it's sort of interesting that's that's that's included as a uh bodily good posture uh attention and I think that maybe that has some nice uh modern uh use perhaps when it comes to technology or people say this sort of thing about you know not being physically active enough or or this sort of thing. Yeah, I think it also shows the I don't know if it's a downside, but it's it's a contrast. The arisatian position is not going to be a egalitarian in the same way the stoic position is going to be. The stoic position is like everybody has access to reason. Maybe they didn't I'm not aware of the Stoics discussing this. You might have some outlier cases with people with um uh cognitive disabilities and then children or people extreme people that are extremely old, for example. there's going to be some outliers. Um, but everybody kind of has access to this where the arithmetian position once you once you it seems very intuitive and positive to add physical goods. You know, why can't we just be a stoic who also likes to exercise and thinks that you know it's important to have good health. But once you enter that then you end up with these um I mean the the the least judgmental way you know taken to taken in a negative way you could say it's like um I don't know if elitist is the right word anything can be taken incorrectly but I guess taken descriptively it is just non-egalitarian yeah I think I've always read Aristotle as an elitist as someone who thinks if you're physically disabled if the you know what you would literally call a deformity is so intense then maybe you can't live a good life. Antiochus though I think he's trying to do some he's sort of a recipientism plus or something like this. He's actually going to say that you can live a good life. You can be happy just maybe not perfectly happy or something like that. So this is a distinction we'll have to get into a little bit later. But he does think virtue is sufficient for happiness but there are that there are levels to it. So in that way, yeah, he saw he's trying to sort of slide between the stoic view, perfect egalitarianism, and maybe this more traditional elitist Arisatilian view. Another way, so yeah, no, I'm excited to get to that um in a moment. Another thing that gets called out here, which I thought was like an interesting way, they almost make this matrix of like six things. You've got like um oh I don't know if I can do it off the top of my head but basically it's along the lines of like pursuing it's like happiness is either achieving you know pleasure absence of pain or like physical and mental goods or it's like pursuing those things and um it's really odd they basically call out which which I think is interesting the fact that it's odd for the stoics to say that like living in accordance with nature is the pursuit of the things in accordance with your nature. It's the appropriate selection and pursuit of indifference regardless of whether or not you achieve them. And they're like, you know, that's just this silly, maybe not just as silly, but it's kind of put as as if like happiness could be the pursuit of pleasure and the pursuit of the absence of pain. It's like, no. Uh, so it's like when you're stoic, you're so close to just this really arising position, which is say, well, it's just the it's about the achievement of those things. It's not about the pursuit of those things. And when you reframe stoicism as the pursuit of those things, um, I mean, I guess that's not how the stoic would frame it. The stoic would put it as the achievement of the good thing, which is virtue. But I I thought that was an interesting way of framing stoicism as, you know, the pursuit of the things in accordance with nature regardless of whether or not you get them. Um, I thought it was kind of it was a interesting criticism. Yeah, it's an interesting taxonomy and Israel points out look there's no sort of Epicurian view which says happiness is the pursuit of pleasure you know that's what's good the pursuit uh of pleasure as an end and you thought you well that's curious or you know the attempt to avoid pain uh so yeah does come into a criticism of sorts um well uh I suppose there are probably two more things that that we should dive into here to understand the view so we have this idea A that's living in accordance with nature that includes both our physical and mental nature. I think it's crucial that goods of the soul are best for this uh view. Um so I have a quick passage here. So it will come to pass that the excellence of the soul is preferred to bodily excellence, and that the excellences of the soul, which are independent of will, are surpassed by those which depend on will, to which excellence is the name virtue peculiarly belongs, and which are vastly superior because they spring from reason, the most godlike attribute of man. So it's interesting. I think this is interesting because you really can see how this is a view that's trying to capture both arisatilian and stoic intuitions. You know, say, you know, there are goods of the body. They're important, but what really matters. So, it's sufficient for happiness are perfection of the soul in particular, virtue. And it's uh that's um what's most distinct about humans as well, this ability to reason. So that uh uh not not just most distinct but also brings to mind some of Epictitus' lines about you know this is the divine part in you. This is the fragment of God that you know every every human possesses this ability to reason. So I think that's uh that's certainly worth calling out the the um a clear hierarchy and then an association because I think Aristotle also has a hierarchy but it's just a stronger hierarchy um and then an association of reason with with really divinity or kind of has this special status. It's not just special because it's the things humans uniquely do which I think maybe maybe is Aristotle's argument at least as I recall it part of it but it's it's special because it it's divine in some sense it is uh it is it is different and better than the other things. Yeah absolutely and there there are different arguments for this you know Piso just lists different cases where he thinks you know we can see human nature being revealed uh as maybe one way to put it. though sort of brings to mind the lines from Cicero in books one and two where he goes over all these heroic the lives of these heroic Romans who displayed moral virtue and you know challenges Epicurans and says look do you think these are the sorts of people where you'd want to put you know he knew how to have a good time on their tombstone no you know what what we see in those lives is you know moral worth really we see you know that that kind of human perfection to uh that that human ability to perfect uh one's virtue and that's that's what we value about it. So there there's I think there's that kind of argument and there's also a focus on knowledge and there's um an amusing anecdote about Archimedes who you might know from uh geometry but you know Archimedes he's so devoted in his pursuit of knowledge that when Alexander the Great overruns his city you know they can't find him anywhere and then eventually they find him in the midst of battle you know drawing geometric figures in the sand or something like this and Piso says though this is reveals man's desire to uh understand things and you know that's one of uh that's it's you know it's so important to humans that we'll uh pursue it even in the face of danger and such. So I think that's a maybe it's not the best argument for the view but I think it's a nice nice way to draw it out. It's a funny example. Um yeah, like what I took from this part was as you said, they go through some like in in an argument of virtue being clearly superior to the bodily goods. They go through some examples of virtuous people or rational people or wise people that are admired. And I just the the part that stuck out to me about that was was wow we often talk about how unintuitive the stoic position is and about how oh it's it's wild that like virtue is the only good or you know knowledge is is the key to happiness. But then they rightly call out that we actually really admire virtuous people. So maybe it's not as unintuitive as that's that was my takeway is like maybe actually stoicism is not as unintuitive as we take it to be when you see these people with amazing character. We all unambiguously as you said wouldn't want to write anything else on their tombstone. You know we wouldn't we wouldn't need to clarify with yeah also knows how to have pleasure uh and didn't feel sad. We don't need to clarify it with these other things. We just say you know was a great person and even the non-S stoic is like that's sufficient. the non-Stoic doesn't need to write on the tombstone and was really rich or you know and was super popular. Um I I thought that was it was just like yeah we often get I think as a stoic I often get like kind of defensive about it of like I have to justify this position but we already do you know back then and even today you know admire really great people. Yeah, absolutely. I think that's that's correct. And it is uh yeah, in a way I think I think you made this comment before, but stoics perhaps the stoic philosophy one way to understand is that it begins with some intuitive judgments and then takes those all the way applies consistency to those judgments. Whether that's you know the the the way we value virtue in people or I think another example of this is the fact that you know we realize in many cases externals actually can't ruin you know the goodness of one's day. You know you can still have a great day even if something apparently bad happens to you. And then you know the stoics take that line to their to its logical conclusion that you can still have a good life even if these apparently external bad things befall you know just you just need to you know make good decisions do what's uh manage what's up to you in the best way possible and that's uh that's you know that's how you have good days that's how you have a good life so I think there's uh there's certainly that's uh that kind of consistency which of course whenever you're consistent now you're going to run into perhaps perhaps issues who's uh explaining a bunch of other intuitions. But um I think that's certainly uh certainly one way to understand stoicism. That makes sense to me. This this again there's the the Stoics, they're famous for these paradoxes. They're famous for these uh sometimes unintuitive claims. You know, everybody's everybody's equally vicious except for the virtuous person or something like that. But it's worth remembering that they have some intuitive, you know, there's some just intuitive clear ideas here as well. Um that the Stoics are, as you said, building up um and taking to the logical conclusion. Cool. Cool. Yeah. So the last uh uh I think part of this view that's important to understand is that this difference that we hit on uh briefly is that there is this idea that you can have supreme happiness versus happiness as such. So that's something Piso and Taiakus um and I think my son says Cicero as well they want to state that things like bodily goods external events can influence one's happiness but crucially for these this parapotetic view they don't render one necessarily unhappy it's just that you can't have a better life if things go well for you. So I think you can you can really draw this out uh in a case that Cicero talks about. You have these two Romans. One has like the they're both virtuous. So you need to imagine them both excellent people, both excellent men. You have Quintis Matelis and he sort of lives the you know the perfect Roman life in uh both internals and externals. You know he has these three sons that are politically accomplished. You know, one of them is made censor, another celebrate to triumph. You know, he had this massive parade due to military success. And uh his three daughters are happily married and he himself had political success and so on. And now compare that with another virtuous Roman, Regulus, who died at the hands of the enemy from starvation and once of sleep. You know, are you really going to say the two of them are just as happy? And I think on on this view what you could say that Quintis Matelis he had supreme happiness. You know virtue plus all these other things went right for him in the world. Whereas Regulus perhaps he had happiness but it wasn't perfect. It wasn't ideal. He did what he could but he ends up starving to death which is uh unfortunate. Terrible way to go. So and and you know that he did have evils of some sort of another happen to him and that influenced his happiness prevented him from being supremely happy. So I think that's uh that's that's the last central part to understand about this view and it's of course different from the stoic view which says which where I think and this is some a place where the stoics perhaps say something implausible is they do say these two men are equally happy. Uh, of course you prefer to be Quintis Matalis. You prefer for things to go well for you. Um, but you know that's not up to you. What is up to you is just just being virtuous. And as we both stated, both of these men were equally virtuous. So in that sense, they're equally happy. Yeah. So like Cicero, so the stoic view of happiness is binary. It's on or off. It's yes or no. You have it or you don't. Um, and then you have it or you don't based on whether or not you have virtue. And then Cicero says, well, I really like the idea or you know the position uh, you know, Cicero is speaking to here or writing. Um, it's really nice to have virtue be sufficient for happiness, maybe even necessary for happiness. Those are both nice things from the Stoics. But we also need to explain the phenomenon that it seems like one of those people had a better life than the other. the person who, you know, the the famous, well-loved, moral, successful Roman with happy kids had a, you know, had something better happen to them than the um person who starved to death. And so, how do we account for that? Well, we just allow degrees of happiness. Both had happiness because they were virtuous. Uh, but one had a greater degree of happiness. It's also this interesting I mean, I also like to to think of happiness as You know, think of it again when I when I'm when I'm working through these arguments, I sometimes switch between happiness, great life, flourishing, and kind of like seeing if the intuition lays any better when you start putting in some of those uh related but you know, different in English concepts. And yeah, it seems to me like one of them had a greater life than the other. If we're calling it udemonia still seems like maybe did one of them flourish more than the other well it depend and then it comes back to this idea you know is there anything to flourishing other than having virtue that says yeah there is something to flourishing other than having virtue it's social success happy family you know healthy body uh so small part of flourishing because it's not divine reason but it it contributes to flourishing and it seems to be quite a plausible position But that's but that's the play philosophically is you're just you're just you're keeping a lot of the good parts of stoicism which is this heavy emphasis on virtue this heavy and and then also I guess the egalitarian aspect because you're still making a happy life available to anyone because if virtue is sufficient for knowledge then anybody could still have a good life. Anybody could still have a good life by making the right choices by by possessing virtue. And then it just it's just then also acknowledging and dealing with the uh you know how do you explain away these other terrible things? Well, you say well there's degrees to happiness, but I'm not denying it of other people. Also makes me wonder why the Stoics are so stressed about this binary in the first place because it's it's such a small shift that I guess resolves so many of the tensions in the stoic view. Um I find it quite plausible. Yeah. What do you think? Yeah. Well, I think this is why Antiochus said that Stokes in the end, they're just playing with words. You know, they say one life is more preferable to the other. But then Antiochus just says, "Look, why don't you just say these other things really are good, but they can never outweigh virtue, and that virtue is in fact sufficient for happiness." So I think that's the uh challenge one has for the stoics. But I think it's interesting that I think this this view in a way is unstable and that's maybe why the stoics didn't land on it in the end. So Cicero himself sort of gives this example of these two men and he says look the stoics are consistent on this you piso and so Antiochus parapotetics and so on are not you know if you really think pain is an evil then a man undergoing crucifixion cannot be happy. If you think children are a good then childlessness is miserable. If one's country is good then exile is miserable. If health is good, then sickness is miserable and and so on. So I think there's that there's this issue where if you think these things are in fact goods or evils, but you're effectively giving them very little weight. What's the grounding for that kind of view? And he and he says, "If they are evils, the man who suffers from them will not be happy. And on the other hand, if they are not evils, down topples the whole parapathetic system. So it's just just to make sure I understand. So the so it's something to say, you know, because the stoics are very careful with their language. So they define good as something it's not the only way you have to define good, but the stoics define good as something that's always selectable, something that's always beneficial. And that's their grounds for calling uh indifference indifferent because sometimes they're beneficial, sometimes they're not. Um so you don't call them good, you call them preferable. The the view here is saying well you've got to have some sort of weight behind calling something good or bad. And if an infinite amount of bad things like you know uh starving to death on the battlefield and you know having your house burn down and your family die, if you're calling these things or you know you're literally crucified. If you're calling pain a bad thing and crucifixion isn't enough to take away happiness, then maybe you're the one playing with language. You're the one that's calling something bad something that you know if if if that much bad things can't take away happiness, why are you even calling it bad, shouldn't you just call it dispreferred? It's like a kind of a a push back. Is is that right? Yeah, I think so. So, it's sort of a dilemma of sorts where it's like, you know, Cisero is quite good at this coming up with different dilemmas for these schools. On one hand, if you're going to say these things apparently have value, but they're never sufficient to make one happy or unhappy, then why aren't you just a stoic, right? Why don't you just say they're preferred, disper, and such? On the other hand, if you're going to say that they have value and they can in fact make one unhappy, you know, if you undergo crucifixion, if you're exiled, if you're an extreme sickness, then you start sounding more like what I call the traditional arisatilian perhaps. Mhm. where what you need is a number of these externals to go right for you and uh some amount of evils as it were can outweigh the goodness of virtue in a life and um I think I think that's sort of the challenge that's the dilemma is look if you give if you want to give these things weight then uh or I suppose you're thinking about these things and you're giving them essentially you know epsilon weight they're nice to have but not needed for happiness can't influence one's happiness and you sound like a stoic but if you give them you know sufficient weight then you sound a little a lot more like a traditional arisatilian perhaps yeah it's good I mean it's good objection I'm trying to think of what I would counter here maybe you already have some in I mean one view is that it gives us ways to evaluate one one benefit to um Anticus' view is that it gives us ways to evaluate people that don't have happiness. Like the Stoics have this weird binary view of everybody's equally vicious. So anybody who's not a sage's life is equally terrible, equally unhappy, and then there are no sages. And it's like what? Well, that doesn't why are you talking like that that doesn't really help. Um, but now Antigus has this view where he says, well, no, this person's life does have, you know, this person's because they're have a good job, a nice family, security, their life is better than the uh other vicious person who doesn't have these things. It allows that kind of evaluation. Maybe maybe it allows more I guess what I'm trying to say is maybe it allows more nuance for the progressor. Um instead of us just constantly thinking about the sage is like a way you know hey if you're a normal person how can you improve your life? Well you can improve your life by like acquiring um these things that are in accordance with your physical and social nature. You know you can if you if you're homeless and you alleviate your homelessness your life has become better. [Music] Um, yeah, if you could be homeless and a sage, maybe you'd be happy anyway, but it gives you kind of a clear path to improvement that isn't just a moral path. Yeah, I think that's a that's a that's a good interesting argument for it. Makes more sense of the progressor. I think the Stoics have moves here though, too. And so they end up being pretty similar. trying to think about I suppose that what they you know what this argument has going for it and what Piso has mentioned is virtue in a way has what sometimes called lexical priority um which means if you're choosing between virtue and some other good you should always assume virtue wins and that I think aligns both with Greek and Roman value judgments and probably our value judgments as well And uh it might be difficult to come up with a more systematic way. You know, the Stokes are so systematic and they have this excellent theory that I can account for uh not just their ethics but also the metaphysics, the logic and such. Um but perhaps if you're trying to defend this view, you might say, well, we're just trying to capture as much evidence as we can and not necessarily be as systematic as the Stoics. Anyway, systematicity when it's when you do it too early, when you try to get systematic too early, uh you'll end up with all these implausible results like the Stoics do. So, if I were trying to defend this view, I think that's sort of what I would be going for is say, look, this this is the best way we can account for of the data. It's their best model of the data right now. And uh yeah, maybe it doesn't have the systematicity of the stoic view, but we know the stoic view is not the right model anyway. So at least this view this view is correct. So that's how I would defend it. That's not exactly what I believe. I think that's kind of the move I would make. What do you think? Why do we know the stoic view isn't the right model? Because of um Oh, just speaking from this person's point of view, I guess they just because of observation that like kind of postto observation that one of these lives has gone better than the other. Yeah, one of these lives has gone better than the other. They have this a different account of human nature perhaps. You know, the bodily goods are in fact good. Um We also they have the kind of cradle argument which we didn't talk about this idea that early humans infants and such they're not corrupted by society. So they have perhaps a better account of the good. Both the sto the stoics make this view. Epicurians or sorry stokes make this argument epicurian make this argument. Parapetics make this argument and they all think you know early early humans value the thing they do. But so anyway, maybe that's not entirely persuasive argument. At least everybody everybody is justifying baby behavior as being their philosophy. This baby burping is clear evidence of the Epicurian view. It's alleviating the pain. It's where the Stoics are like it's achieving it's like achieving preservation of itself. Is it un that's funny? Um yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, so one thing that I'm I mean one thing that I'll add for this I'm not sure if you have more to say about the the um cisor's arguments but kind of in our conversation and this like framework that I've been developing over the course of our conversations the other Caleb is you kind of end up now this is a really nice one because this is something I think I've been looking for for a while which is kind of like I don't know if if Aristo who we talked about before is kind of like stoicism plus or like hardcore stoicism and it's like we indifference are not preferred preferred or dispreferred. They're totally indifferent. Then this is maybe like stois is a minus or I don't know how you would call it but it's like now what happens if you give slightly more value to indifference not enough to take away the sufficiency or the necessity of virtue for happiness but you give slightly more value to indifference. And that's kind of the play here. And that's a nice positioning especially for someone who thinks Aristotle is going too far and Aristotle's view that like yeah sorry you were a nice person but you've got a physical deformity. So, I don't think, you know, I don't think you had a good life. And it's like it's like a somewhere in between there as we're really, you know, if if it's a philosophical spectrum, we're really zooming in now and getting some interesting nuance in between the positions, which I kind of like. Yeah, I think this you get a good sense of um I think the sort of options Cicero thinks are live what he thinks is valuable from the different schools especially stoicism and the serissitilian view and I think the way you sort of lay out on one side you have aristo stoisism plus but what's something that sort of falls in between stoicism and uh this traditional arisatilian view this parapotetic uh view perhaps that's it I think I think it's interesting this although Cicero says this view is closest to his he's still wrestling with it so I think there's maybe a theme there this sort of philosophical theme where uh you know Cicero himself ends with this objection to uh Piso to Antiochus to the parapotetics uh and basically saying look you guys aren't consistent and Pisa responds to it but it's not exactly a persuasive response. Uh so there's a kind of philosophical aporeia almost some kind of uncertainty uh that that you finish with uh which which is perhaps appropriate you know as um as a philosophical dialogue as some amount of philos philosophical uh you know progress a better way to put that is there's uh you know Cicero sort of honing in on the what he thinks is is the best account for human happiness very important serious type question you know it says says what he thinks is the most plausible but ends with some amount of uh uncertainty nonetheless. So it's not fullon skepticism. Uh but also you don't get the sense that he's a dogmatic fellow. Yeah. It's great still iteration. I feel that way in my own progress sometimes like I feel like sometimes I see a lot of myself in this book. I see a lot of myself wrestling with this view. I think this has put into view, you know, as we were going through the books and I tried to articulate earlier my problems with in my own practice with indifference, you know, the fact that I don't feel like stoicism really accounts for the fact that there I see my identity probably extending a bit beyond my mind. I see my flourishing as extending into my body and into my social relationships and uh things like this. And but I also think that virtue is the most important thing and it's like this I think provides an alternative not one without issues but stoicism is also not without issues. So I would say like in my personal practice um and I feel that way online sometimes too. I mean I know online is not real life but sometimes in stoicism communities I think if you like it's like if you if you object to stoicism in any sense it's like they almost take offense to it like oh no we all here agree with stoicism and we're just still trying to understand what it is and it's like how can you agree with it if you're still trying to understand what it is um like for me there's something inherent to like we're trying to understand what it is to see if we agree with it and it should always be that kind of at the forefront and that rejection of dogmatism I think is really important and and just like a stoic value. Um, so anyway, I I I really appreciate basically Cisero's project here. I'm saying thumbs up Cisero. Good work. Is it interesting and it's ongoing ongoing process? I think so. I think so. I think for me I I've always found something like this parapotetic view uh very plausible. But over the years I've come to see stoism actually is as as having more theoretical advantages than this view. I think it the parapotetic view really is kind of unstable uh in some ways I think make it worse perhaps. We chatted about this the last episode. But I think what comes through for me in terms of uncertainty from from this chapter is you you almost have the sense that Cicero has a little bit of a leaning towards a traditional arisetilian view which I think is intuitive. You know maybe when you talk about cases of physical deformity it's less intuitive to liberal egalitarians today. But if you think about cases where people just have they're unlucky, they have tragic events happen to them, their loved ones, you know, do you still want to say those, you know, each of these cases, you know, those people could have achieved happiness or something like that? You know, there is something intuitive to the idea that I think a lot of people just naturally say no, you know, they're not happy in those tragic unfortunate situations. And uh I think that's sort of you know this this dilemma that Cisero's putting towards the parapotetics I think is uh um a challenge you certainly a challenging one and one worth wrestling with thinking through. So uh yeah we should do some more Aristotle perhaps do some more Cicero and uh keep on uh keep on uh thinking through these issues and discussing them. Yeah, agreed. And I I think I think a point to end on I mean just a reiteration of what you were saying before of how you know Cicero is such a smart guy, such a well- read guy and is still I think as you said taking not a full skeptic position but still one where it's like I'm learning I I'm always understanding the best parts of Epicuranism and criticizing them. The best parts of Stoicism then trying to criticize it. the best part of Arisilianism and then trying to criticize it and seeing the value in that as as he develops his own craft of living well and seeing these schools as you know answers or guides or instructors. But if we really take that craft analogy, there is something to be said for kind of developing your own style or developing your own nuance within a style and not falling into you somebody else's style too quickly or being dogmatic and following it. And I think this book on ends uh really recommend it to anybody listening and I think it's a good example both of a smart person who's taking that question seriously both reflecting on his own reflecting on ancient philosophy but then also taking it seriously for how he lives his own life without being dogmatic or without trying to you know it doesn't have that kind of socratic that Socratic thing you see in Plato where somebody presents a position and then Socrates does his counter an argument. Everyone's like, "Of course, Socrates. How could I have ever thought differently?" Um, which doesn't feel like kind of a genuine skeptical piece. It feels almost like it's leading towards a foregone conclusion, I guess, in like later later Plato. I don't really feel that here. I feel like every chapter I read, I'm like persuaded and then dissuaded and then persuaded and dissuaded. And it's a that's a that's a that's a cool experience to see basically steel manning everything before you pick it apart. Yeah, I think so. And I think it's also worth I just one other note is you have this theme of questioning some skepticism that comes out but also the philosophies that Cicero lands with clearly finds most plausible are those ones that place a lot of value on virtue. So stoicism he ultimately rejects but he admires the focus on moral worth and then the parapotetics perhaps that's closer to what Cicero believes they also put moral worth as something that's sufficient for happiness and then even you know a sort of egalitarian reading of Aristotle he's going to place virtue on a pedestal and think you know that's essential for happiness even if perhaps uh externals can also influence one's happiness is essential. So I think there's that common theme running through each of those and you know I think he he clearly doesn't like epic epicurionism. There are lots of barbs that are unpicurious uh throughout these discussions and I think that's maybe one reason why or the central reason he doesn't uh like the epicurans perhaps is their uh the fact that they value virtue indirectly. It's it's good because it's uh promotes the pursuit of pleasure avoidance of pain. Yeah. they get the they're they're in they're in trouble. Um, cool. Anything else to to finish off uh our Cisro on ends review? Yeah, I don't think so. I think that's all I got. Thanks for following along. Thanks for listening to these. Um, if you all have suggestions for other books uh you'd like us to review, certainly uh let us know. I should also say since by the time this will be going out, I think this will be a relevant change. We're updating our newsletter, we're going to be using a different platform and we really like to use a lot of the community features. So, we're moving to Substack. Substack, I think, supports better commenting chats and such. So, do check out the STO letter if you haven't already. And I think we'd like to uh Michael and I are going to be active um online there and we'd like to both with a podcast, this newsletter and such uh focus on growing a little bit more of a of a community. So of people interested in stoicism, interested in philosophy, interested in discussions like these. So do check that out. Yeah. Awesome. Looking forward to it. Cool. All right. See you, Michael. Thanks. Bye. Thanks for listening to Stowa Conversations. Please give us a rating on Apple Podcasts or Spotify and share it with a friend. If you want to dive deeper still, search Stowa in the App Store or Play Store for a complete app with routines, meditations, and lessons designed to help people become more stoic. And I'd also like to thank Michael Levy for graciously letting us use his music. You can find more of his work at ancient liar.com. And finally, please get in touch with us. Send a message to stoa@ stoameditation.com if you ever have any feedback, questions, or recommendations. Until next time.
