---
title: "Stoa Content: Vice 2022"
slug: vice-2022
type: meditation
drive_id: 1sccUZvxRdPg2BFJNMdgY0llTpvQdM6WtaLE1GXYNKuU
drive_url: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sccUZvxRdPg2BFJNMdgY0llTpvQdM6WtaLE1GXYNKuU/edit
modified_at: 2022-11-10T19:00:58.501Z
playlist_id: null
playlist_type: null
status: final
---
# Intro – DO NOT READ

In ancient times, the greatest glories went to conquerors. Kings and generals realized their power through war, politics, and logistics. Today, we praise the entrepreneur or statesman who shapes the world around them in a similar fashion.

Many of us are not as competent as generals like Alexander the Great or entrepreneurs like Thomas Edison. We procrastinate, act foolishly, and avoid difficult situations instead of facing them head-on.

But the Stoics and other ancient philosophers do not necessarily treat the powerful with deferential respect. For they may be just as afflicted with vice as the rest of us.

Instead, the ancient Stoics praised Diogenes, the famous Cynic philosopher. Those days the term cynic referred to a specific philosophical school, one that shared much in common with the Stoics.

Alexander the Great had heard of Diogenes and went to meet him. When he encountered Diogenes, Diogenes was relaxing under a tree in the sunlight. Alexander asked the philosopher if there was anything he could, as the world’s most powerful man, give him. Diogenes told him to get out the way, as he was blocking the sun. 

The ancient philosopher and student of Stoicism, Arrian, said the following about the conqueror: 

“it is evident that Alexander was not entirely destitute of better feelings; but he was the slave of his insatiable ambition.”

The Stoics see Diogenes as fundamentally free and Alexander and his court as playthings of ambitions that did not originate from themselves.

Instead of glorifying conquerors, the Stoics praised the virtuous, whatever their station in life. Instead of pursuing pleasure, the Stoics valued people who were free from uncontrollable passions. It is such people who are living well.  

The Roman Stoic Seneca wrote:

“Do you ask me whom I have conquered? Neither the Persians, nor the far-off Medes, nor any warlike race that lies beyond the Dahae; not these, but greed, ambition, and the fear of death that has conquered the conquerors of the world.

He who has learned to meet death has unlearned how to be a slave.”

At the end of our life, our thoughts will return to who we were throughout life. We may be proud that we acted well and regret acting poorly. Such thoughts will not rest too much on external accomplishments, but on who we were and the relationships we formed with others.

Without a doubt, each of us possesses regrets and remorse. We’ve each displayed cowardice, foolishness, and injustice in our actions. We’ve each acted with vice.

Vice is the term for the opposite of virtue. When we’re virtuous we are who we were meant to be: people of excellent character. When we’re vicious, we express bad character and make mistakes. More pointedly, when we act with vice we’re not the person we should be.

This series is all about eliminating vice and cultivating virtue. This is a project of a lifetime. Yet in this short course, we can share what the Stoics learned and developed – and perhaps the techniques and philosophy here can trigger a transformation.

We will approach this topic by considering the four cardinal virtues: self-control, courage, justice, and wisdom. These are virtues that anyone is capable of developing and displaying.

Let’s talk about each.

The ancients believed in the motto “nothing in excess”. Moderation is the key to self-discipline. Someone who lacks discipline acts impulsively and shuns too much of the world or greedily gulps it up. Self-control can be understood as the state in between the vices of extreme deficiency and excess.

Modern culture makes it easy to be greedy. We can gorge ourselves on TV, the internet, food, drugs, or others’ praise. In fact, much of our economy and social world is geared towards making it easier and easier for people to treat themselves to excess. This results in a world of distraction and purposelessness.

Yet there are also the sins of extreme asceticism and deficiency. This can look like retreating from the world and harming our relationships. Or it can look like using self-control not as a virtue, but as a means to make ourselves feel superior to others.

Instead of these extremes, the Stoic seeks to be moderate and self-controlled. This means being in full possession of themself and not falling into the temptations of excess or deficiency.

Through reflecting on who we want to be and devising plans for building habits, we will cultivate self-control with Stoa.

The virtue of courage falls in between recklessness and cowardice. The reckless proceed without fear and blunder their way through life, making clumsy mistakes. The coward stays on the sidelines, never entering the fray. Imagine three people considering climbing to the top of the mountain. The reckless will proceed without fear and hurt themselves – perhaps others too. The fearful will never start and never experience the beauty of the summit. The courageous will work through their fear and proceed with prudence and purpose. They’ve prepared for climb, brought the right equipment, and chosen a smart route.

In this course, we’ll meditate on our fears and devise ways to pragmatically and realistically overcome them.

Justice concerns how we treat others. We’re social creatures and, in the Roman emperor and Stoic Marcus Aurelius’s words, one of our proper tasks is to treat others well. 

Some people are too altruistic and defer too much to others. Not in the sense that they give too much to charity, but in the sense they defer too much to others. In the extreme form, someone who always puts others' needs above their own loses their sense of personal identity.

But the more common vice is selfishness. We’re too selfish to bother treating other people well. We’d rather do what is convenient for us. To make it easier we come up with stories that justify our behavior. Acting with justice demands giving others and yourself their due, and therefore thinking and acting in a way that achieves that.

To become more just, we’ll clarify our values and learn from role models.

The last virtue is wisdom. Wisdom is knowing how the world works. Knowing what matters and acting on it. The wise are assured in who they are and their role in life. They do not make foolish mistakes. They are able to combine practical knowledge with a sense of the bigger picture. I hope you have encountered people with these traits in your life.

To become wise we have to actively learn from our experiences and mistakes every day.

With Stoa, we can reflect and learn from our experiences instead of foolishly making the same mistakes over and over again.

Satisfaction with our lives is a matter of acting with virtue. Imagine if you realized these four virtues everyday in every decision. You, and those around you, would be great in a way that many conquerors, artists, and athletes have failed to be. Such a life is the one we are meant to have.

You want to be someone capable of ruling yourself. Life is too short for anything else. 

In this course, we’ll reflect on how to achieve this and come closer everyday. This is a life long project. Return to these exercises over and over again.

# Self-control I

## Intro

Self-control is the foundation of virtue.

The Stoics thought of self-control as moderation. 

Many of our mistakes are our vices of excess. We overindulge in the pursuits of power and status or gorge ourselves with meaningless pleasures. No doubt this is easy to do. We live in a society that rewards power and status and makes temptations easier to access than they ever have been. A life lived in excess is a life that is not our own. Instead, it’s the life of desires that come and go. To be truly free, we must possess self-control.

The Stoics were not ascetics. They did not preach shunning the good things in life. In fact, such a response would be immoderate.

Instead, they encouraged us to act without excess or efficiency. The Stoic philosopher and teacher Epictetus encouraged us to see life as a banquet:

“Remember that you ought to behave in life as you would at a banquet. As something is being passed around it comes to you; stretch out your hand, take a portion of it politely. It passes on; do not detain it. Or it has not come to you yet; do not project your desire to meet it, but wait until it comes in front of you.”

## Meditation

Ensure that your posture is comfortable but alert and that you’ll be able to meditate for the next few minutes.

20

Start by bringing to mind recent moments where you lacked self-control. Where you acted with excess or deficiency.

30

Simply catalog events where you lacked self-control recently. Do this in an objective manner. 

30

Now, choose a specific moment and ask, what would it look like to act with self-control in this situation? Be as precise and detailed as you can.

15

Picture yourself acting with self-control. Rehearse acting with self-control in the same way an athlete may mentally rehearse a move – do it slowly and in detail.

45

Take a few more moments to rehearse acting with self-control. Remember, acting with discipline sometimes involves willful decisions at the moment. But more often it involves setting up situations to avoid losing control. If you want to give up drinking, it’s better to remove every opportunity you have to drink, instead of leaving alcohol readily available in the house. 

45

Now, contemplate what your life would look like without self-control. What would happen if you acted foolishly without moderation?

45

Is this the life you want to have?

15

With this contrast in mind, note that a life of virtuous moderation is the happier one.

Take a few moments to come up with a specific plan to show more self-control. Be ambitious, but realistic.

30

When you’re ready, take a few deep breaths.

16

And if your eyes are closed, open them.

## Outro

The virtues are skills that can be practiced. Like an athlete training by drilling and mentally rehearsing their play, meditations and reflections are a way to develop virtue. 

Today, we focused on the virtue of self-control. This involves acting with moderation. It means enjoying life’s pleasures without losing ourselves in them or shunning them. Epictetus tells us to picture life like a banquet – we should treat our host and companions well and enjoy the food, without holding onto it too tightly.

In the end, very few people look back on their life and wish they exemplified less self-control. It’s mistakes of excess and deficiency that lie behind many of our regrets.   
    
With this in mind, remember your plan and exemplify self-control to the best of your ability today.

Let’s end with a line from the Roman philosopher Seneca:

“Hold fast, then, to this sound and wholesome rule of life; that you indulge the body only so far as is needful for good health… And reflect that nothing except the soul is worthy of wonder; for to the soul, if it be great, naught is great.” 

# Self-control II

## Intro

Improving our self-control is possible. 

By changing how we think, we can change who we are. Who we are is what we think.

Behind many acts of excess are false beliefs. Hence, improving our self-control involves improving our beliefs.

This can be seen by understanding what’s going on when we lose control after experiencing a negative emotion. Anxiety may trigger an immoderate reaction. The historian Plutarch tells the story of a man named Thales of Miletus. Thales argues against having children because of the devastation that losing them could cause. But as Plutarch notes “it is irrational and ignoble to renounce the acquisition of what we want for fear of losing it.” Anger may provide the impetus for foolishly lashing out. Alexander the Great was once so consumed with wrath that he attacked one of his best friends, mortally wounding him.

Behind these behaviors is mistaken thinking. Whether it’s the belief that we cannot handle loss, the idea that our anxiety is justified, or the thought that we must have revenge, such things fuel our negative passions. The Stoics saw extreme negative emotions as a kind of madness and we should too. 

In such moments, we forget what matters. We forget how much we value self-control and how much power we have to act differently.

Today we will contemplate a role model. Someone whose behavior exemplifies self-control and moderation. We will pay special attention to their thought patterns. For it is through changing our thoughts that we can change who we are.

## Meditation

Start by taking a few deep breaths and, if you like, close your eyes.

16

Take a moment to prepare to reflect on self-control. 

10

Start by bringing to mind what self-control is. The Stoics see self-control as moderation: as acting and thinking without excess or deficiency. Put this in your own words.

30

Now bring to mind a role model. Someone who exemplifies self-control. It can be anyone. They don’t need to be perfect, but they should be someone whose discipline you admire.

45

Once you have someone in mind, picture them acting with self-control. Do this in a detailed and precise way.

45

Continue visualizing your model acting with self-control. But now pay special attention to their thought patterns. How do what and how they think shape how they act?

45

Now turn your attention to your own life. Bring to mind areas of your life where you can display more self-control.

30

What advice might your role model give you? How would they encourage you to think and act?

45

Picture yourself acting with self-control in detail. Be as detailed and precise as possible.

45

Let’s end by summarizing what you will take from this exercise. What will you apply to your life?

30

When you’re ready, take a few deep breaths.

16

And, if your eyes are closed, open them.

## Outro

One of the Stoic’s favorite metaphors is the Herculean fork. We’re not talking about silverware, but a story about the Greek and Roman hero, Hercules. While on a journey, Hercules encounters a split in the road. As he sits down to contemplate his future, he is visited by the goddesses of virtue and vice. The Goddess of vice tells him that her name is happiness and if he takes the path she advises his life will be full of ease and pleasure. On the other side, the goddess of virtue advises Hercules to take her path – it is long and difficult, but it is truly good. The goddess of vice is not to be trusted.

Life is full of these forks. Each time we decide which path to go down, we shape who we are. Each situation we face is a question that we can choose to answer with virtue or vice.

By changing how we think, we can be less reactive to the situations we are faced with. Through excellent thought, we can make excellent decisions.

In this exercise, you clarified what acting with self control looks like. Now apply it to your day.

Let’s end with a quote from Epictetus on the importance of reason:

“You ought to realize, you take up very little space in the world as a whole – your body, that is; in reason, however, you yield to no one, not even to the gods, because reason is not measured in size but sense. So why not care for that side of you, where you and the gods are equals?”

id: 621

# Cowardice I

## Intro

Acting well requires courage.

Courage is the mean between recklessness and cowardice. 

The coward submits to their fear. They fail to act when it matters, resulting in remorse. The reckless fail to heed their doubts. They misapprehend situations and make foolish decisions, resulting in regret.

The courageous act appropriately. They make good things happen, even when doing so is scary and hard. In the simplest terms, courage is the knowledge of what is worth avoiding. 

It doesn’t mean a lack of fear. Fear in many situations is natural and useful. It can communicate important information. But the brave do not let natural fear and caution transform into excessive alarm.

Some express courage in extreme circumstances. 

For example, the Stoic James Stockdale was captured as a prisoner of war during the Vietnam war. He survived through courage, principles, and leadership. 

We can also think of the courage of his wife, Sybil Stockdale, who organized The League of American Families of POWs and MIAs and pressured the US Congress to acknowledge the suffering of prisoners of war and negotiate for their release.

Some of us will face extreme circumstances like these, but many will not.

Nonetheless, for many of us, it’s easy to not be courageous. We can hide in the crowd and evade responsibility. 

The real punishment doesn’t come until we've been crushed by disappointment at who we have become. We all know people who decided to coast by out of cowardice and complacency instead of standing up for themselves and those around them.

Let’s meditate on the importance of courage today.

## Meditation

Ensure that you can meditate for the next few moments.

4

Keep an alert posture.

4

Start by taking a few deep breaths.

16

Now bring to mind a model. Someone who is courageous. It can be anyone. From a family member to a fictional character.

20

Now that you have someone in mind, reflect on how they exhibit courage. How do they act? Who are they?

45

And how does your model's behavior fall in between the mean of recklessness and cowardice? Answer this question now.

45

Now return your attention to your own life. Where have you acted courageously recently? Review those moments, no matter how small or impressive.

30

Now consider where you think you can be more courageous – when are you too timid or too incautious?

45

We’ve described courage as the mean between cowardice and recklessness. One strategy for becoming virtuous is to overcorrect your behavior and aim for the opposite vice. So, if you are timid, consider how you can act in a way that may seem reckless. If you are too brash, consider how you would act in a timid way. Reflect on how you can become more courageous by aiming for the opposite vice.

45

And return to your model, what advice may they give you?

30

Let’s end by choosing a single situation where you want to improve. Be specific and realistic.

30

Take a few deep breaths.

16

And open your eyes.

4

## Outro

As you go throughout your day, remember the courage of your heroes.

In ancient Rome, the Stoic Agrippinus refused to attend the tyrant Nero’s silly games. Once he was approached by a friend who was deliberating whether to attend one of Nero’s spectacles. He advised him to attend. His friend responded by asking Agripinnus why he wouldn't attend. Agrippinus’s response is “because I didn’t even deliberate about the matter.”

Agrippinus doesn’t think about it because he’s made courage a part of his character.

Whether you face extreme circumstances like Agrippinus and the Stockdales or whether you face ordinary challenges, be brave.

Let’s end with a line Epictetus describing another episode from Agrippinus’s life:

“Once, when \[Agrippinus\] was preparing for lunch, a messenger arrived from Rome announcing that Nero had sentenced him to exile. Unflustered he replied, ‘Then why don’t we just move our lunch to Aricia.’”  
id: 856

# Cowardice II

## Intro

A core Stoic technique for becoming more courageous is praemeditatio malorum. This negative visualization technique helps build better plans and prepare for setbacks.

In the words of Seneca:

"If you would not have a man flinch when the crisis comes, train him before it comes. Such is the course which those men have followed who, in their imitation of poverty, have every month come almost to want, that they might never recoil from what they had so often rehearsed.”  
id: 1237

Many modern therapists apply exposure therapy in their sessions. If someone is anxious about something, say they have an extreme phobia of spiders, then it can be useful to expose them to spiders in an incremental and careful way. First, you may start with an image of a spider. Then you may introduce a plush spider or toy. Then the therapist may show a film of arachnids. At each step, the patient becomes more accustomed to the idea of a spider and may eventually lose their debilitating phobia.

We can apply the same idea with praemeditatio malorum exercises. The idea is to meditate on negative situations at a level that is challenging but not harmful. As you become stronger, you may raise the stakes. And eventually, you may realize that what you fear is survivable and also develop more robust plans.

For example, if you’re nervous about giving a speech you can imagine it going poorly. Perhaps you miss a few lines or commit an awkward faux paux. By doing this in detail you realize that this wouldn’t be such an awful outcome. Further, you may gain the confidence to bounce back from any mistakes or come up with insights to improve your preparation.

Hence, by imagining facing adversity, we can prepare ourselves to do so in the real world.

## Meditation

Ensure that you’re comfortable and prepared to meditate for the next few moments.

4

Take a few deep breaths, if you like, close your eyes.

16

Let’s start by reviewing what’s happened recently. Catalog recent events in your life.

45

Now notice where you’ve acted courageously. Highlight those aspects of your character that you admire.

30

And where do you want to be more courageous? Do you sometimes act recklessly? Have you been too fearful?

45

Settle on a situation where you want to be courageous.

15

Now practice praemeditatio malorum. Ask yourself how things could go wrong and then visualize that in precise detail. Remember to choose a situation that is unpleasant, but not debilitating. 

30

Continue imagining how things go wrong. Do so in a detailed way. Like an athlete practicing a play, try to picture yourself and the scene as clearly as possible.

45

Now that you’ve visualized how things may go wrong, consider whether you can take steps to prevent it. Often there are practical strategies available to reduce the likelihood that things go wrong.

45

And consider whether what you pictured was fundamentally bad. Is it something that is truly worth avoiding? Is it something that is worth sacrificing your values and character to avoid?

30

And then return to the prospect of negative visualization. Know that what you feared has not come to pass. We can take gratitude in that. Things could always be worse. Even so, know that if it does come to pass, you can survive. You can be courageous in the face of fear.

30

With this in mind, return to the breath.

16

And, if your eyes are closed, open them.

4

## Outro

Well done.

This exercise requires practice. It is important to expose yourself to the right level of discomfort. Imagining truly terrible events or exceptionally unlikely happenings does not help. 

For example, if you’re visualizing a public speech going wrong, it may not help to visualize being abducted by aliens mid speech. 

Instead, picture ways things may realistically go awry. Do so in accord with the incremental approach of exposure therapy. Start with smaller obstacles and move to larger ones. This is an exercise you can return to again and again.

Remember there are two key reasons to practice praemeditatio malorum. First, it can improve your planning. If you’re afraid of missing lines during a speech, you may notice that there are some particular lines you’re having difficulty remembering. Simply practice those. Second, it can prepare you psychologically for when things go wrong. What we fear may not matter on a deep level. What fundamentally matters is what we have control over, our thoughts and decisions, that is it.

Let’s end by reconsidering the line from Seneca:

“If you would not have a man flinch when the crisis comes, train him before it comes. Such is the course which those men have followed who, in their imitation of poverty, have every month come almost to want, that they might never recoil from what they had so often rehearsed.”

id: 1237

# Injustice 

## Intro

Stoicism is a philosophy that has been adopted by everyone from slaves to emperors, students to entrepreneurs. It’s a philosophy that highlights the importance of the mind and reasoning well, but it is also a philosophy of action. It’s the focus of becoming a virtuous person that has rendered Stoicism so valuable to people, whatever their station.

The four cardinal virtues are self-control, courage, justice, and wisdom. Today, we will focus on justice.

Justice is ultimately about treating others well. Marcus Aurelius once wrote:

“In a way treating others well is our proper task”

It is what we are made for.

One can describe justice as falling in between the means of extreme altruism and selfishness. Some people are so altruistic that they become too submissive to others and fail to develop into distinct individuals. For most of us, however, the real problem is that we’re too selfish. We’re too busy chasing status or pleasure to pause and focus our attention on others.

Let’s meditate on how we can be more just today.

## Meditation

Take a moment to ensure that you can meditate for the next few moments.

4

Take a few deep breaths and, if you can, close your eyes.

16

Let’s start by calmly reviewing your life. What has happened recently?

30

As you review what’s happened recently, pay special attention to your decisions and thoughts – the things that are up to you.

45

Now bring to mind the moments when you displayed justice. When did you decide to treat others rightly? Bring these situations to mind no matter how large or small, important or significant, they seem.

45

Notice these situations and commit to becoming the kind of person who acts rightly.

20

When you’re ready, turn your attention to where you want to be more just. In what areas of your life can you display more virtue? How can you become a more just person?

45

To make these thoughts more concrete, imagine that you were replaced by the best version of yourself. Someone who is capable and willing to always do the right thing. How would this person act? Visualize a few examples in detail.

40

As you do this, focus on how the best version of yourself faces the difficulties of acting justly, but does it anyway.

40

You can have the thoughts and make the decisions of the best version of yourself. You’ve acted justly and can do it again and again until it’s second nature.

4

With this in mind, summarize your reflections so far. What concrete and specific thing can you take with you into your day?

30

With firm resolve, take a few more deep breaths.

16

When you’re ready, open your eyes.

## Outro

You have probably noticed that each of the four virtues are linked.

People may be altruistic pushovers because they are cowards. They disrespect themselves. They wouldn’t like others being pushed around the way they are. Some people are selfish because they lack self-control. They can’t make the right sacrifice.

In *Stoic Wisdom*, Stoic Nancy Sherman tells the story of Hugh Thompson. During the Vietnam war, Hugh Thomson witnessed the mai lai massacre from a helicopter – American troops firing on innocent civilians. At that moment, he acted with courage, discipline, and justice. He quickly figured out what was going on and then acted to save women and children – even ordering his own American troops to return fire if American soldiers tried to prevent them.

Hugh Thompson’s acts are a clear example of how virtues come together.

Many of us will not face such extreme or tragic circumstances. In our own lives, we will be put in situations that demand justice and courage. We need to shape ourselves into the kind of people who will act rightly when these situations arise.

Let’s end with a reminder from Marcus:

“Live out your life in truth and justice, tolerant of those who are neither true nor just.”

id: 99

# Foolishness 

When Socrates approached the Oracle of Delphi, she told him that he alone was wise.

Socrates pondered on this for some time. How could he be wise when he knew so little? He realized that he alone did not profess to know what he did not know. So many speak of what they do not know.

Wisdom is a matter of knowing what matters and how you fit in. It requires knowledge of facts and values, but perhaps not as much as you think. Wisdom is realized by the ability to recognize what’s important in a situation and make excellent decisions.

How does one become wise?

Wisdom is earned from experience. However, this doesn’t happen automatically. It’s necessary that one learns through experiences and has the courage and self-control to make better decisions. The wise may tend to be older than the young, because they’ve had more life experience, but this is not always so.

So wisdom requires learning from experience. It also requires knowing who you are. Above the temple of Delphi, were Socrates visited the oracle, were the words “Know thyself.” You need to recognize who you are and how you fit in. We each play many roles in life: family member, student, teacher, employee, boss. The wise know what their role requires of them and juggle competing factors in order to make the best decision the situation allows.  
Let’s reflect on wisdom today by doing a view from above exercise.

## Meditation

Ensure that you’re able to meditate for the next few moments.

4

Take a few deep breaths. If you’re able, close your eyes.

16 

Today we will take the view from above. We do this to gain perspective and reflect on how we fit in the world. The wise can see a much larger picture than the narrow prisms of the foolish.

4

Start by picturing yourself wherever you are meditating. Imagine looking down on yourself from the ceiling.

30

Now visualize whatever city you are in. Enlarge your perspective by considering how thousands of others are acting around you. Pay attention to those who are acting well. You’re surrounded by people trying their best.

30

And zoom out even further and picture your nation. Imagine yourself looking down on the millions of lives.

30

When you’re ready, zoom out even further and imagine looking down on the earth. A world full of billions of humans and many other animals.

30

From this larger perspective, ask yourself, what matters?

30

From above, ask yourself how do you fit into this picture? What is your role?

30

Think of your relationships and how those determine how you should live. As a child, parent, sibling, friend, employee, boss, citizen or whatever else may be.

35

And return to picturing the earth with your role in it in mind.

20

Narrow your image to the nation.

20

And imagine what is surrounding you in this city.

20

Finally, return to yourself meditating.

20

Reflect on what you will take with you from this exercise

30

When you’re ready, take a few deep breaths, and open your eyes.

16

## Outro

Excellent work.

By regularly taking the view from above, you can see the world and your place in it more accurately.

In a Biblical story, King Solomon is famously wise when dealing with other matters. People traveled far to see him and get a fair minded hearing for his disputes. King Solomon was widely regarded as wise for this reason. Yet, though he was wise in other’s dealings, in his own matters he was foolish. His excessive love of wealth and pleasure resulted in his own kingdom’s demise.

Psychologists have called this the Solomon paradox. The idea is that we’re better at making decisions from a third-person perspective than our own. 

The view from above is a way to remedy this bias. When we see ourselves from above, we’re better able to let the trivial fall away and see what ultimately matters.

Use this technique throughout your days. Remember what matters when you’re tempted by vice – whether it’s the desire out of fear, selfishness, greed, or foolishness, such desires can fade away when our situation is seen from above. Our lives are short and we’re a part of a much larger picture. Our job is to develop ourselves into excellent people and play the roles we’re given.

Let’s end with a quote from Marcus Aurelius:

“Dwell on the beauty of life. Watch the stars, and see yourself running with them.”

id: 2